Title: 2604.24236v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.24236v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 01:43:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
1

# Deep Learning -Enabled Dissolved Oxygen Sensing in Biofouling 

# Environments for Ocean Monitoring 

# Authors: Nikolaos Salaris 1,2 , Adrien Desjardins 2,3 , Manish K. Tiwari 1,2*  

> 1

# Nanoengineered Systems Laboratory, Mechanical Engineering Department, University 

# College London, London WC1E 7JE, UK  

> 2

# UCL Hawkes Institute, University College London, London W1W 7TS, UK  

> 3

# Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Colombia, 

# 5500 -2332 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC Canada V6T 1Z4 

# *Corresponding author details 

# Email:  m.tiwari@ucl.ac.uk , Phone: +44 20 3108 1056 (Manish K. Tiwari) 

# Keywords: Machine Learning, Physics -Informed Neural Network, Vi sion Transformer ,

# Dissolved Oxygen, Quenching of Phosphorescence, Camera -Based Sensing, Biofouling, 

# Climate Monitoring, Stern -Volmer 2

# Abstract 

The escalating climate crisis and ecosystem degradation demand intelligent, low -cost sensors 

capable of robust, long -term monitoring in real -world environments. Absolute dissolved oxygen 

(DO) concentration is a key parameter for predicting climate tipping points. Inexpensive 

optoelectronic sensors based on microstructured polymer films doped with phosphorescent 

dyes could be readily deployable; however, signal drift and marine biofouling remain major 

challenges. Here, we introduce a sensing paradigm that co mbines camera -based DO sensors 

with a visual transformer (ViT) -based physics -informed neural network (PINN) for high -fidelity 

sensing under biofouling conditions. Training and testing data were obtained from an algae -laden 

water tank over 14 days to captur e accelerated biofouling. The ViT -PINN , which embeds the 

Stern -Volmer (SV) equation into the loss function, reduces mean average error (MAE) by 92% and 

89% compared to classical statistical and ML approaches, achieving ~2 μmol/L absolute error. 

A deep ense mble further quantifies predictive uncertainty, enabling self -diagnostic sensing. 3

# Main 

The intensifying pace of climate change and anthropogenic pressure on aquatic ecosystems has 

created an urgent, global need to widen environmental monitoring [1]. Oceans in particular are 

severely under -measured. To this end, Dissolved Oxygen (DO) is an Es sential Ocean Variable by 

global observing systems [2,3]. Specifically, steady warming of oceans is driving a widespread 

decrease in DO, a phenomenon known as ocean deoxygenation, that severely disrupts marine 

ecosystems and can trigger the collapse of ent ire fisheries [4,5]. This makes DO a potent early 

warning indicator for the crossing of critical climate tipping points [6], with the expansion of 

hypoxic "dead zones" representing catastrophic ecological thresholds for marine life. 

Our ability to forecast climate events is critically undermined by a lack of robust, widespread 

measurements. Current DO models can deviate from observed deoxygenation rates by as much 

as 100% - a profound uncertainty that can only be reduced by a new gene ration of sensors 

capable of providing high -resolution, long -term measurements in the field [4]. Simultaneously, 

monitoring algal biomass is vital for tracking harmful algal blooms [7] and for optimizing industrial 

applications like carbon capture and biof uel production that depend on robust, affordable 

sensing [8]. However, deploying sensors for long -term, autonomous in -situ measurements is 

severely hampered by a universal challenge: biofouling [9]. The inevitable colonisation of the 

sensor surfaces by mic roorganisms alters their response, leading to signal drift and catastrophic 

failure, necessitating costly and frequent maintenance. Specifically, these issues hamper 

optical and electrochemical probes [10,11]. 

To combat biofouling, significant effort has been invested in materials -based solutions designed 

to prevent organism attachment, such as hydrophilic and hydrogel -based coatings [12], bio -

inspired and biomimetic coatings [13], copper -free and metal -free hyb rid coatings [14], biocide -

leaching coatings [15,16], and non -toxic, low -surface -energy polymers [17]. Nonetheless, the 

eventual development of a resilient microbial fouling layer limits the efficacy of all such methods 

[18,19]. Critically, for luminescenc e-based methods, the application of an anti -fouling layer 

presents a fundamental trade -off with sensor performance. One such example is optical DO 

sensing via quenching of phosphorescence; a promising alternative to traditional 

electrochemical probes, offe ring high sensitivity, avoiding oxygen consumption and large drifts 

[20]. These sensors rely on the Stern –Volmer (SV) principle, where the luminescence of an 

embedded indicator is dynamically quenched by oxygen. For such sensors, applying anti -

biofouling c oatings can introduce optical interference and corrupt the sensor kinetics [21]. 

Moreover, the real -world application of such DO sensors is constrained by expensive 

instrumentation. Therefore, the inherent trade -off associated with anti -biofouling coatings and 

the high cost of current solutions necessitate a shift towards intelligent sensing. This would 

enable a practical deployment of self -contained sensor packages at scale for long periods of 

time and high geographic coverage. 

Traditionally, phosphorescence -based DO measurements have been quantified by a single, 

spatially -averaged measurement from a photodetector, but recently the use of cameras has 

provided 2D analyte maps that allow for a better understanding of the underlying physical 

processes [20, 22 –30]. In addition, the SV relationship, which underpins luminescence -based 

oxygen quantification, carries the implicit assumption that the sensing matrix is spatially 

homogeneous [23]. While this a reasonable approximation in con trolled laboratory conditions, it 

collapses in real -world deployments, where spatially heterogeneous processes such as 

biofouling, patchy film degradation, and uneven illumination are unavoidable [9, 24, 28]. 

Crucially, in the case of the algal growth the heterogeneity is not static: the spatial distribution of 4

fouling evolves continuously, meaning that the sensor regions yielding the most reliable signal at 

one time point may be among the most degraded at another. This non -stationarity renders any 

calibration strategy based on a fixed selection of pixels fundame ntally brittle over extended 

deployments. 

This fundamental mismatch between the mathematical framework of calibration and the 

heterogeneity of luminescence -based sensors poses an obstacle to robust, long -term real -

world applications. Realizing the full potential of imaging -based sensors therefore demands a 

shift, steering away from global calibration curves and going towards intelligent frameworks that 

resolve the governing physics locally, distinguishing valid signal from artifact on a pixel -by -pixel 

basis. To this end, Physics -Informed Neural Ne tworks (PINNs) can assimilate physical laws as a 

powerful inductive bias, promoting parsimony and improving generalization, especially with 

noisy, real -world data [31]. Fundamentally, this acts like a principled regularizer: it lowers data 

requirements, st abilizes training in the presence of noise, and reduces overfitting to spurious 

correlations when compared to purely data -driven models [32,33]. 

Here, we address the challenge of optical DO sensing via quenching of phosphorescence in a 

realistic (noisy) environment by introducing a low -cost intelligent sensing framework that is 

robust to spatio -temporal heterogeneities. Our approach integrates thre e key innovations: 1) a 

novel, highly scalable oxygen -sensitive film based on a PtOEP –polystyrene composite, 

fabricated using a simple, self -assembly dip -coating method [34]; 2) a low -cost, automated 

imaging system using a Raspberry Pi and a UV LED; and 3) a computational framework built on 

PINNs and spatial feature extractors. This framework moves beyond simple calibration by 

directly embedding the SV equation into the training process and applying ML techniques 

towards an imaging -based optical sensor. We validate our approach against a comprehensive 

hierarchy of methods, starting from classical pixel -averaging and "best pixel" selection to 

sophisticated, feature -engineered gradient boosting and ViT -based models. We demonstrate 

through direct comparison tha t our ViT -based PINN architecture is more accurate, with a 92% 

lower MAE of 2 μmol/L (when trained in chronological order) across 14 days of accelerated 

biofouling, compared to the typical average -based calibration. This methodology allows high 

spatio -temp oral resolution of the sensor in biofouling conditions. Crucially, while using relatively 

simple hardware and components, the robustness of our framework implies that it could serve 

as a blueprint for resilient, self -diagnosing, and scalable optical sensor s, which are crucial for 

monitoring climate tipping points. 5

# Results 

Limitation of typical Averaging and Physics -Based Methods 

To evaluate our sensing frameworks under realistic fouling conditions, we constructed a low -

cost imaging platform comprising a Raspberry Pi camera, a 395 nm UV LED, and a PtOEP –

polystyrene oxygen -sensitive film fabricated by dip -coating (see Methods). The sensor was 

submerged in a fertilised algae -laden water tank and calibrated daily over a 14 -day period against 

a commercial Pyroscience DO probe, providing ground truth across five oxygen concentration 

ranges (Fig. 1) . This accelerated biofouling protocol a llowed us to systematically assess model 

performance as the algae colonised both the sensor surface and the surrounding water column, 

progressively degrading the optical signal through direct surface occlusion. 

Figure 1: Experimental Setup 

Schematic depiction of the experimental setup including: a UV LED, a water enclosure, the 

industry DO sensor, the phosphorescent film, the Raspberry Pi microcontroller. An emphasis is 

given on the placement of the film where the direction of the film was o n the other side of the UV 

transparent Acrylic that was submerged in the water tank. 

The first approach was to apply a 'Global Average' model (GA), which simulates a standard single -

point calibration by fitting the Stern -Volmer (SV) equation to the mean red intensity of all pixels 

(for each frame) [30]. This is equivalent to the single -poi nt measurements used as an industry 

standard when calibrating the sensor. This proved highly inaccurate for predicting dissolved 

oxygen concentrations in a biofouling environment, resulting in a high cross -validated Mean 

Absolute Error (MAE) of 28.2 μmol/L . Critically, when training and testing all models, cross -

validation was performed by holding out an entire experimental day as the test set in each fold 

(Leave -One -Out Cross -Validation) rather than randomly partitioning individual observations 

across days (see Methods). This choice guards against the temporal autocorrelation and 

covariate leakage that random subsampling would introduce, since measurements acquired on 

the same day share environmental and biofouling conditions. This provides a stringent test of the 

model's ability to generalise to genuinely unseen temporal conditions. 

We then explored a more sophisticated 'Best Pixels' strategy. In this approach, each of the 2,304 

pixels (each image was down sampled to 48x48 pixels from 1920x1080) was individually fitted to 

a linear and non -linear (two -site approach) SV equation across the training data to derive the 6

fitted parameters and a suite of performance metrics from physics -derived statistics (“Per Pixel 

Fitting” strategy) . Specifically, we systematically selected the top 10, 100, 1,000 and all 2,304 

performing pixels based on ranking criteria derived from the calibration procedure and based on 

their physics -derived parameters, including: the quenching constants ( 𝐾 𝑆𝑉 ), the Dynamic Range 

(DR ), the zero -oxygen intensity ( 𝐼 0), the Limit of Detection (LOD) and the goodness -of -fit ( 𝑅 2) to a 

linear and non -linear (two -site) SV equation (see equations 4 to 8 for definitions in the Methods 

section). The red -channel intensities of these best performing pixel cohorts were averaged to 

create a robust 'super -pixel' signal for prediction (one cohort for each metric). This naive feature 

selection offered a marginal improvement, with the best -performing strategy ('Top 10 by  𝑅 2') 

(R210NL) achieving an MAE of 23.4 μmol/L. Both linear (1 -site) and non -linear (2 -site) SV models 

were evaluated for all strategies, with the non -linear implementation providing slightly better but 

still insufficient results; MAE of 23.4 μmol/L versus 26 .0 μmol/L, for the best non -linear and linear 

strategy, respectively. Nonetheless they fundamentally remained inaccurate. 

Additionally, we tested a physics -reinforced machine learning approach using a LightGBM 

(LGBM) model [35], which was selected for its computational efficiency when handling large 

datasets. Here the physical quantities are supplied as input features to the model without 

enforcing physical consistency during training, which is distinct from a PINN where the governing 

equation is embedded directly in the loss function. This model was supplied with a rich input 

feature set that included the red channel intensit y statistics (average for each frame and 

standard deviation for each oxygen concentration measurement interval) but also their 

aggregated physical parameters (mean  𝐼 0, mean  𝐾 𝑆𝑉 , mean LOD , mean DR, mean  𝑅 2). This hybrid 

approach (LGA) yielded a further improvement, reducing the MAE to 18.5 μmol/L. 

Nonetheless, the poor performance for both approaches was quantitatively confirmed with 

parity plots where predictions from both the typical GA and the physics -reinforced LGA models 

show significant deviation and wide scatter relative to the line of perfec t agreement (Fig. 2A -B) .

Furthermore, the residual plot, which shows prediction error versus the ground truth DO, reveals 

that the error magnitude is not constant, indicating that the model struggles to perform 

consistently across the operational range of DO concentrations tested with wide fluctuations 

(Fig. 2C) . Additional analysis of the LGA method highlights once more its unreliability. The error 

distribution histogram is broad, with a large standard deviation ( σ), indicating a wide range of 

prediction errors rather than a consistent, predictable offset (Fig. 2D) . These results collectively 

demonstrate that methods reliant on spatial averaging or static feature selection are 

fundamentally brittle with high prediction MAE (Fig. 2E, F) . In essence, they fai l to account for the 

dynamic, non -uniform nature of biofouling, where the 'best' performing sensor regions are not 

static. This establishes the critical need for an architecture that can explicitly learn and adapt to 

the spatiotemporal heterogeneities of a lgal growth on the sensor surface. 

The underlying cause for the failure of these averaging -based methods is revealed by analysing 

the spatial distribution of the sensor's response. Heatmaps of the pixel -wise goodness -of -fit (R²) 

to the SV equation show that there is no strong physical corre lation between the predictors and 

the underlying film phosphorescence. Specifically, non -uniformly distributed regions of the 

parameters were found both within and outside the boundaries of the sensor film for linear and 

non -linear models (Fig. 3) . This pr onounced and erroneous spatial heterogeneity does not 

represent the underlying phosphorescent emission properties of the films and becomes 

apparent when compared to the raw RGB frame of the sensor. This means that these methods 

fail to represent the sensin g film in the spatial domain using simple fitting and averaging 

techniques. 7

Figure 2 : Failure of Conventional and Physics -Reinforced ML Methods in the Presence of 

Biofouling. 

Parity plots of (A) the 'Global Average' (GA) model and (B ) the best -performing LGBM model using 

aggregated physical parameters (LGA). The annotation box displays the R² and MAE (in units of 

μmol /L) for each model as metrics of prediction accuracy. Plots of (C) the Prediction errors 

versus the ground truth oxygen concentration and (D) the histogram of the distribution of 

Prediction Errors (a red line shows the point where the prediction error is 0). The y -axis shows the 

normalised frequency (Proportion), and the inset legend box provides the mean (μ) and standard 

deviation ( σ) of the e rror. (E) Bar chart comparing the performance of conventional methods 

using the cross -validated test MAE as a metric. This included the average -based methods in 

tandem with the 'Best Pixels' strategies, including GA, LGA and the best -performing 'Best Pixels' 

strateg ies with different cohorts of top -performing pixels using specific physics -derived metrics. 

The “L” or “NL” in the name of the models corresponds to using a Linear and a Non -Linear SV fit, 

respectively. Specifically, these models are (left to right): i) IO -1000 -L (top 1000 pixels selected 

by their zero -oxygen I₀ intensity); ii) R2 -10 -NL (top 10 pixels selected by their goodness -of -fit R²); 

iii) IO -100 -NL (top 1000 pixels selected by their zero -oxygen I₀ intensity ; iv) DR -1000 -NL (top 

1000 pixels selected by their Dynamic Range); iv) LOD -1000 -L (top 1000 pixels selected by their 

Limit of Detection); v) R2 -1000 -L (top 1000 pixels selected by their R²); and vi) KSV -1000 -L (top 

1000 pixels selected by their quenching constant  𝐾 𝑆𝑉 ). (F) A bar chart of MAE against the ground 

truth DO for the 5 main DO concentration ranges during the calibration procedure using the LGA 

model and their standard deviation in terms of MAE. 8

Figure 3 : Spatial Heterogeneity and failure of “Best Pixels” approach. 

Images of the unprocessed frames at two different fouling and oxygen levels: (A) 100 % V/V  𝑁 2

and 0% V/V%  𝑂 2 taken at the first day prior to algal growth and (B) 95%  𝑁 2 and 5%  𝑂 2 V/V at the 

5th day, where there is significant surface occlusion due to algal growth. Heatmaps showing the 

per -pixel fitted parameter of the goodness -of -fit (R²) to the linear (C) and non -linear (D) SV 

equations, averaged across all cross -validation folds to show the spatial heterogeneity of the 

sensor response. 

Spatial Information with Machine Learning: Improvement Without Understanding 

To establish a rigorous ML baseline, we evaluated a hierarchy of LightGBM (LGBM) and 

Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models, with hyperparameters optimised using Optuna 

[36] (full details in Supplementary Section S1). We first tested position -agnostic LGBM models 

that treat each pixel as an independent sensor: a) a baseline using RGB values and temperature 

(LRGBT; MAE 41.8 μmol/L), b) a variant augmented with per -pixel non -linear SV parameters 

(LRGBTSV; 34.6 μmol/L), and c) a fully -featured version including all physics -derived statistics 

(LRGBSVTP). Incorporating pre -compute d physical features yielded only marginal gains. 

Preserving pixel location through a position -aware LGBM, where the flattened 48×48×3 image 

and SV parameters served as input features (LSSV; 13.2 μmol/L), delivered a substantial 9

improvement, though appending additional physics -derived statistics (LSSVP; 13.2 μmol/L) 

offered no further benefit. Downsampling the resolution had minimal impact (13.6 μmol/L at 

64×64) but significantly increased computation time. The next step was to tr ain CNN where we 

provided the full 48x48x3 RGB frames as input, together with temperature. Replacing the 

flattened representation with a CNN (ResNet -18 with CBAM attention), which directly processes 

the full 2D image grid to capture spatial correlations, y ielded a further leap, reducing the MAE to 

8.1 μmol/L ( Fig. S1A, Supplementary Information Section S1). 

In detail, the CNN's predictions clustered tightly along the line of perfect agreement (y=x), in stark 

contrast to the wider scatter of the best LGBM (LSSVP), particularly at low DO concentrations 

(Fig. S1B ). Permutation importance analysis revealed that the position -aware LGBM relies on 

raw intensities at fixed pixel positions ( Fig. S1C ), making it inherently brittle to the non -stationary 

fouling patterns discussed above, while for the position -agnostic models’ importance was 

distributed across temperatur e, RGB values and physics statistics ( Fig. S1D ). However, this 

broader feature reliance still proved ineffective without spatial relationships between pixels. This 

brittleness was further confirmed by heatmaps of the pixel -wise MAE for the position -agnostic 

models (LRGBT, LRGBTSV, LRGBSVTP), which rev ealed distinct regions of persistent high error 

across the sensor surface, demonstrating that adding physics -informed features may alter the 

spatial error pattern but cannot resolve the underlying heterogeneity (Fig. S2 ). 

These results collectively establish two key findings: i) spatial awareness, defined as the ability 

to learn correlations between pixels rather than treating them independently, is the dominant 

factor in prediction accuracy; and ii) that the CNN, despite i ts superior performance, operates as 

a black box whose learned attention maps failed to align with the known spatial distribution of 

the phosphorescent film, learning implicit correlations without explicit knowledge of the 

quenching physics. This motivates the physics -informed approach that follows. 

Physics -Informed Neural Network Achieves State -of -the -Art Accuracy and Parsimony 

The next step was to constrain the deep convolutional neural network with a physics -based loss, 

so that the model “learns” to spatially identify regions where quenching of phosphorescence is 

occurring due to oxygen presence. By penalizing departures from t he SV physics alongside 

standard supervision losses, the network learns to separate true quenching dynamics from 

artifacts. In detail, the core innovation of the PINN, as it is implemented here, is its dual -objective 

loss function. The network is not train ed solely to match ground truth data but is simultaneously 

constrained to obey the governing physical laws of the system. The total loss, which the model 

seeks to minimize, is a weighted sum of a data -driven loss, and a physics -based loss (1). This 

approac h was further enhanced by a third loss component, which provides direct supervision for 

the model's internal estimation of biofouling against labelled ground truth (2). In the latter, the 

total loss that the model seeks to minimize, is a weighted sum of a data -driven loss, a physics -

based loss, and a biofouling supervision loss, representing a more constrained version of the 

base model. The biofouling supervised values came directly from the crystal violet 

measurements using UV -Vis spectrometry. 

𝐿 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝐿 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 + 𝜆 𝑝 ⋅ 𝐿 𝑝 ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑠 (1)

and 

𝐿 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 = 𝐿 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 + 𝜆 𝑝 ⋅ 𝐿 𝑝 ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑠 + 𝜆 𝑏 ⋅ 𝐿 𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔 (2)10 

Where (see Supplementary Information Sections S2, S3 for full details):  

> •

𝐿 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎  is the supervision loss, which measures the discrepancy between the model's final 

prediction and the ground truth sensor reading.  

> •

𝐿 𝑝 ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑠  is the physics residual, which quantifies how well the sensor's response adheres 

to the SV equation.  

> •

𝐿 𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔  is the new supervision loss, which is the MSE between the predicted 

biofouling score and the normalised ground truth.  

> •

𝜆 𝑝 and  𝜆 𝑏  are hyperparameters that balance the relative importance of the data fidelity 

represented as  𝐿 𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎  and the physical consistency terms  𝐿 𝑝 ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑠  and  𝐿 𝑏𝑖𝑜𝑓𝑜𝑢𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑔  .

The physics loss is defined as the residual between the physics -predicted DO values 

([𝑂 2]𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 ) and the ground truth ( [𝑂 2]𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑡 ℎ) DO concentration (which is different for 

every pixel). For a linear version of the SV equation this would mean that the residual is defined 

as (3). 

𝐿𝑝 ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑠 = [𝑂 2]𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑒𝑑 − [𝑂 2]𝑔𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 𝑡𝑟𝑢𝑡 ℎ = (𝐼 0

𝐼 ) − 1 − 𝐾 𝑆𝑉 ⋅ [𝑂 2]𝐺𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑 𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑡 ℎ (3)

Importantly, the source of non -uniformity in the performance of the pixels corresponding to the 

phosphorescent film was associated with uneven: a) biofouling, b) illumination, c) application of 

the coating, and d) degradation of the phosphorescent material (such as photobleaching). In 

essence, the real -world conditions result in deviations from spatial homogeneity. In this 

direction, the resulting residual maps (error between the physics part and the ground truth data) 

double as self -diagnostic indicators, highlighting where the physical principles hold and where 

they deviate. This yields a system that is both more accurate and more interpretable, a 

fundamental advantage of applying PINNs. Specifically, by mapping the pixel -wise physics loss 

back to the imag e space, we can visualize the model's reasoning, which in turn informs us about 

the spatiotemporal properties of the sensor. The physics -based loss term is not only a 

regularizer; it is a powerful diagnostic tool. In effect, the PINN turns physical consist ency into a 

more generalizable learning signal, enabling robust performance under drift and scarcity of 

labelled ground truth for spatially resolved measurements. 

In particular, for any given input image, we can compute the pixel -wise SV equation residual (3). 

This residual map directly visualizes where and how much the sensor's response deviates from 

the expected physical model (Fig. 4A) . Essentially, it identifies regions of high error where the 

pixel intensities I (x,y) are not accurate oxygen sensors. In practice, the model has learned a 

"Physical Consistency Map": it quantitatively identifies pixels that are badly performing that 

cou ld be a consequence of the n on -uniform application of the coating and degradation of the 

film, non -uniform distribution of the excitation light and occlusions due to biofouling and bubble 

formation. This provides a direct, real -time indicator of the sensor's spatially resolved 

perfor mance and was shown to be closely aligned to the average intensity from the red channel 

(Fig. 4A -B), which on its own though could not be a good predictor in noisy environments across 

multiple days, as shown earlier in the first section of the Results. How ever, an important result 

was that the attention maps of both PCNN and CNN did not exhibit this alignment ( Fig. 4C -D) .

This shows the difficulty of relying solely on the neural network’s output to focus on the correct 

regions for best performance and leaves room for improvement with other deep learning 

algorithms. 11 

Trained end -to -end on raw image data using a Leave -One -(Day -)Out Cross -Validation (LOOCV) 

strategy, the PINN achieved a best -case -scenario test MAE of 5.4 μmol/L when the biofouling 

supervision term was included (PCNNB, equation 2; Fig. 5A ) and 5.5 μmol/L without it (PCNN, 

equation 1; Fig. 5B ). The negligible improvement when using the biofouling supervision is 

important, since it shows that external supervision using the UV -Vis data for the levels of 

biofouling in the water does not provide a significant b enefit towards the prediction accuracy. 

Overall, the PCNN model resulted in a 32 % reduction of MAE over the best CNN baseline test 

MAE and a 58% reduction from the best LGBM model (13.2 μmol/L). This was achieved while 

being more parsimonious, learning a compact 512 -feature representation of the image (versus a 

48x48x3=6912 feature mat rix). Additionally, the training history plot confirms the stable and 

effective optimization of the PCNN (Fig. 5C) . It illustrates the concurrent minimization of the 

validati on loss and the physics -regularization loss for each consecutive epoch. This synergistic 

learning process, where improving physical consistency aids in data fitting and vice -versa, 

demonstrates that the model is integrating physical constraints to achieve a more generalizable 

solution. However, from the histograms of the prediction error, the standard deviation remained 

relatively high, yielding values of ~8 and 10  μmol/L for PCNNB and PCNN, respectively  (Fig. 5D -

E) . Importantly, when looking at the feature importance during the Optina hyperparameter 

optimization procedure, the physics loss weighting factor (lambda physics) was identified as the 

most influential hyperparameter (Fig. 5F) . This underscores the critical role of physical 

regularization to achieve optimal model convergence and performance. 

We also compared our standard approach, i.e. implementing a PINN where the network learns a 

single set of SV parameters for the whole frame, to a "Physics -Guided" Neural Network (PGNN) 

where we use pre -computed SV parameters for each pixel (following again the “Per Pixel Fitting” 

strategy) . Specifically, in the PGNN, SV parameters were pre -fitted for each pixel via the classic 

calibration route and fed to the network as spatial maps. Crucially, using the PGNN resulted in a 

significantly higher MAE of 8.7 μm ol/L. Hence, we concluded that the end -to -end PINN 

implementation was both superior and parsimonious. This demonstrates that allowing the 

network to learn effective physical parameters through a generalized SV equation per 

experimental day provides superior regularization and is a more robust strategy compared to 

fitting every pixel to pre -fitted local SV parameters .12 

Figure 4: PINN Performance heatmap visualization. 

Heatmaps of: (A) the physics Residual, (B) the average red intensity over the entire calibration 

procedure (reversed colors), (C) the normalised attention of the CNN and (D) the normalised 

attention of the PCNN. 13 

Figure 5: PINN Performance. 

Parity plots of the CNN based PINN with (A) and without (B) the biofouling component (PCNN and 

PCNNB, respectively). The correlation between predicted and ground truth data is quantitatively 

shown with R² and MAE as the metrics of reference. (C) Training history plot showing the 

concurrent decrease of data loss and physics loss in the y axis, versus the training epoch (the 

lighter colours indicate the standard deviation from each experiment day). Histograms of the 

prediction errors for the PINN mo dels (D) PCNN and (E) PCNNB. The y -axis shows the normalised 

frequency (Proportion), and the inset legend box provides the mean (μ) and standard deviation 

(σ) of the error. (F) Bar chart of the Optuna hyperparameter optimization feature importance for 

PCNNB. 

Visual Transformers (ViT) 

To further advance the state -of -the -art and address the potential limitations of local feature 

extraction in CNNs, we replaced the ResNet -18 backbone with a more powerful Vision 

Transformer (ViT) architecture [37,38]. Unlike CNNs, ViTs employ a self -attent ion mechanism 

allowing the model to weigh the importance of every image patch relative to all other patches 

simultaneously, providing a global, contextual understanding of the entire sensor surface in a 

single layer. This is particularly advantageous for i dentifying large -scale, diffuse patterns 

characteristic of developing biofouling that may be missed by localised feature regions. The ViT -

based PINN (PViT) achieved a remarkable cross -validated best -case -scenario test MAE of 1.3 

μmol/L ( Fig. 6) . This represents a further 76 % reduction in error compared to our best ResNet -

based PINN and an order -of -magnitude improvement over traditional methods, establishing a 

new benchmark for accuracy. 14 

Furthermore, a crucial aspect of all sensors is the ability to define the uncertainty of the sensor 

output. This is a fundamental bottleneck in ML -based frameworks where achieving a low average 

error is insufficient for a trustworthy sensor, as prediction accuracy can fluctuate significantly 

depending on the initialisation weights in the training of the model. This was especially true in the 

case of implementing ViTs. We tried to address this with a quantification of the prediction 

uncertainty by implementi ng a Deep Ensemble methodology: instead of training a single model, 

we trained an ensemble of 3 identical PViT models for each cross -validation fold, with the only 

difference being their random weight initialization around the hyperparameter optimised valu es 

(optimization was performed once more using Optuna). The low number of random initializations 

within the ensemble is due to the high computational resources needed for each iteration. 

Notably, defining the DO value as the average prediction (PViT -EA) of each member of the 

ensemble produced lower MAE of 1.7 μmol/L ( Fig. 6A ), while using the best choice by MAE 

between the ensemble members for each fold (PViT -EB) yielded an MAE of 1.9 μmol/L ( Fig. 6B ). 

Importantly, for all models, and especially in the train -based MAE choice of models, some folds 

(experiment days that were used as the test sets) constituted large outliers, significantly affecting 

the MAE and the variance between the experiment days ( Fig. 6C ). This once more emphasizes 

the large interexperiment spatial and temporal variability of the algal biofouling. Moreover, the 

PViT -EA and PViT -EB models still yielded a high standard deviation of prediction errors ( σ) of 2.6 

and 2.8 μmol/L, respectivel y ( Fig. 6D, E ) compared to the MAE. This was not significantly different 

from the model with Optuna optimised initialisation parameters and choosing the best -case -

scenario test MAE models, PViT -O, with an MAE of 1.3 μmol/L. Fundamentally, all PViTs provided 

lower test MAEs compared to the previous PCNN models ( Fig. 6F), and this was true even when 

comparing the best -case -scenario CNN models versus the realistic models chosen from best 

training and validation MAEs (see next section). 

Furthermore, the standard deviation of the predictions in the ensemble of each fold serves as an 

additional quantitative measure of the model’s uncertainty. The hypothesis is that high standard 

deviation implies the models in the ensemble disagree, indicat ing a challenging or out -of -

distribution sample for which the prediction should be trusted less. This was verified by a strong 

positive correlation between the predicted standard deviation and the actual absolute prediction 

error with a Pearson’s Correlati on Coefficient (PCC) of 91% for 3 ensemble members when 

training and testing on the 11 best days (Fig. 7A), which falls to 54% including the two experiment 

days with high outliers. In essence, the ensemble’s uncertainty metric proved to be a reliable 

indicator of its performance in most experimental cases. This means the model can effectively 

self -identify low confidence measu rements, a critical feature for real -world deployment where a 

sensor must be able to flag its own potentially unreliable readings. Th is provides a foundation for 

future "smart sensors". However, one issue that became apparent with the use of transformers 

is the higher physics loss. This indicates that for future studies different architectures and 

additional computational resources shou ld be implemented to yield greater prediction 

performance. Despite this, there was once more a concurrent reduction in the physics loss and 

the validation error (Fig. 7B ). Importantly, we categorised the results by DO concentration, 

revealing that higher D O ranges correlate positively with increased prediction error ( Fig. 7C ), 

which was expected from the SV physics. This highlights specific DO regimes where the model 

faces greater difficulty. Additionally, we used a rejection curve to demonstrate that 

systematically discarding the predictions with the highest calculated uncer tainty from the 

ensemble members’ predictions leads to a monotonic reduction in the Test MAE, confirming that 

the uncertainty quantification effectively acts as a reliability filter (Fig . 7D). 15 

Moreover, we evaluated the framework’s scalability and data efficiency through a sequential 

learning analysis by steadily increasing the training days and observing the decrease in the test 

MAE (choosing each time the models with the lowest train MAE). Sim ulating an ongoing 

deployment, we incrementally increased the training set size from a single initial day up to12 

days. In each iteration, the model was trained on the first N Days (randomly chosen), and strictly 

tested on the remaining unseen future days (N+1 to 12) (Fig. 7E) . Also, we replicated this with a 

strict chronological separation of training and testing days, while also including a validation day 

to guide us in choosing the optimal model. This produced a similar monotonic reduction of the 

MAE (Fig. 7F) . In both cases, we observed a rapid convergence in performance, showcasing the 

scalability of the proposed sensing framework based on a small number of calibration iterations 

prior to deployment. 

Furthermore, the global nature of the ViT's self -attention mechanism proved superior for 

generating coherent and physically meaningful diagnostic maps. It was important showing that 

the two independent views, the physics residual and the attention map, tel l the same consistent 

story . This shows that there is a strong inverse correlation between the attention weights and the 

physics loss; regions with high physics loss receive low attention, while regions with low physics 

loss receive high attention (Fig. 7G -H) . This synergy is the core of the self -diagnosing capability. 

The physics loss identifies why a region is bad (it violates the physical law), and the attention 

mechanism shows how the model intelligently adapts to this failure by ignoring it. The attention 

maps, in contrast to the CNN methodology, produced by the ViT were sharper and clearly 

delineated the boundaries of the films. This interpretability, combined with quantifiable 

uncertainty, moves beyond simple prediction and towards a truly self -diagno stic device, allowing 

the sensor to assess confidence in its predictions. 16 

Figure 6: Vision Transformer Performance. 

The parity plots for the (A) PViT -EA and (B) PViT -EB. (C) Box plots showing the distribution, 

median, spread (IQR), and outliers of error data for each of the 13 experimental days/folds for the 

4 models: PViT -EA, PViT -EB, and PViT -O models chosen for best test and train MAE. The 

histogram of the prediction errors for models (D) PViT -EA and (E) PViT -EB. The y -axis shows the 

normalised frequency (Proportion), and the inset legend box provides the mean (μ) and standard 

deviation ( σ) of the error. (E) A summary bar chart showing the MAE for the best performing 

models: (from left to right): PViT -EB, PViT -O (test), PViT -EA, PCNN -B, PCNN, CNN, PGNN. 17 

Figure 7: ViT uncertainty of the prediction error. 

(A ) A scatter plot of the predicted uncertainty from the model PViT -EA (standard deviation of 

predictions) versus the absolute prediction error for every pixel. (B) Training history plot showing 

the concurrent decrease of validation loss and physics loss in the y axis, versus the training 

epoch (the lighter colours indicate the standard deviation from each experiment day). ( C)

Absolute error of the prediction shown as bars for specific oxygen bins averaged over all the 

ensemble members. ( D) Improvement of t he test MAE based on the rejection of high uncertainty 

measurements from the ensemble members’ predictions (from 0 to 95% rejection). (E) The 

lowest test MAE achieved plotted versus the number of experiment days used for training 

(chosen randomly for each iteration), indicating the scalability of the proposed framework. (F) 

The lowest test MAE achieved plotted versus the number of experiment days used for training, 

implementing a strict chronological order and using one day as validation each time. A side -by-

side comparison of the physics confidence mask (G) and the averaged Physics Residual Maps 

generated by the PViT (H) .18 

Robustness to Temporal Extrapolation and Independent Configurations 

To assess the viability of a sensing framework for realistic "deploy -and -forget" applications, a 

strict temporal forecasting methodology was further investigated. In essence, for a field 

application, the sensor must be able to infer the DO concentration ba sed on a model that has 

been trained on chronologically previous data using the ML framework proposed. To show this, 

it is important that DO levels are inferred for chronologically future time -points based solely on 

historical calibration data. Up to now, the majority of calculations (exception is Fig. 7F )

presented had separate training and testing samples where one test is left out for testing 

(LOOCV), and the MAE reported was the lowest test MAE achieved after training with a number 

of epochs (25 -35). Hence, it is crucial to also present the results for a strict chronological split 

(training/test) where we use the first 11 days for training, validate on day 12 and test on the 

unseen final day (day 13). In this scenario, the PViT, once more, successfully e xtrapolated the DO 

values, maintaining a low MAE of 2.5 μmol/L and an  𝑅 2 of 99.5%. Moreover, we developed and 

applied the model using LOOCV for all days, this time with 11 days for training and 1 for 

validation, and the average test MAE across all days was 2.0 μmol/L ( Fig. 8 A, B ). This, in 

combination with the fact that the lowest validation and training MAE correspond to the same 

model (given the best choice with an ensemble methodology) for every experimental day, 

indicates that this framework allows for the optimization of a m odel that can successfully infer 

DO concentration in biofouled environments. Additionally, by choosing a model without the use 

of a validation set and without the ensemble technique, the MAE was higher at 3.5 μmol/L, 

indicating that the combinat ion of the ensemble and validation set is beneficial in the more 

realistic scenario. 

Nonetheless, it is pivotal to highlight the generalizability of this new sensing paradigm. Thus, we 

validated the framework’s transferability through a completely independent experiment involving 

a single newly fabricated PtOEP film, a different UV -LED con figuration, a continuous DO 

concentration range, a temporally dynamic DO, and unfertilised algae over a 4 -day period. This 

further proves the adaptability and resilience of the proposed framework to different setups and 

conditions by testing it on a unique set of film heterogeneities, DO concentration distributions 

and a different biological growth rate. Once more, we use a strict chronologic -based splitting of 

the data into training and testing, thus we trained the model on the first 3 days and tested on t he 

4th . The validation set in this case was 5% of the total sampling pool, randomly selected, not part 

of the training set and chronologically before the test samples. We used the same DO and 

temperature sensors. 

In this case, both the PCNN and PViT models demonstrated remarkable resilience despite the 

small training dataset. The PViT and PCNN models achieved an MAE of 4.4 μmol/L ( Fig. 8C ) and 

4.8 μmol/L ( Fig. 8D ), respectively, significantly outperforming the Classical approach (21.4 

μmol/L) ( Fig. 8E ). Once more, the higher DO levels incurred the highest errors, just as expected 

due to the SV physics and previous results (e.g. Fig. 7C ). It should be noted that the slightly higher 

overall MAE compared to the previou s experimental configuration was expected due to a) smaller 

training datasets, b) the use of one film, c) larger range of DO concentrations, and d) higher 

temporal fluctuations. Despite the increased MAE, these results confirm that the proposed 

architectur e is generalizable for DO concentration measurements in water via quenching of 

phosphorescence with high accuracy. 19 

Figure 8: Robustness to temporal extrapolation and generalizability to independent 

experimental setups: 

(A) Parity plot illustrating the PViT model's performance in a strict temporal forecasting scenario, 

where the model was trained on historical data (Days 1 –11), validated on Day 12 and tested on 

the unseen final day (Day 13). (B) Bar plot displaying the Test MAE for the PViT model obtained for 

each of the 13 experimental days using a validation set and Leave -One -Out Cross -Validation 

(LOOCV) strategy, demonstrating consistent performance across the dataset. The bottom row 

evaluates the framework's transferab ility in a completely independent "blind" experiment 

involving a new sensor film and setup. Parity plots compare the prediction accuracy on the 

unseen test day (Day 4) for the PViT model (C) , the PCNN model (D) , and the best case of the 

Classical calibration (“Best Pixels”) approach (E) .20 

# Discussion 

In this work, we demonstrate a significant advancement of in -situ optical sensing of DO. We 

show that the vulnerability of luminescence -based sensors in real -world environments lies not 

inherently in the materials, but in the calibration techniques and sen sing methodology. The 

transition to imaging modalities exposes the fundamental limitation of assuming spatial 

homogeneity in both non -imaging approaches (such as in industry practice) and in the average -

based calibration strategies. However, sim ply expanding the sensor’s spatial resolution but still 

relying on traditional averaging or static "best -pixel" selection failed catastrophically to predict 

the DO concentration (MAE  ≥ 18.5 μmol/L). The same was true for position agnostic feature -

based ML approaches with a significantly larger input matrix (MAE  ≥ 34.6μmol/L), and even 

spatial feature LGBM models (MAE  ≥ 13.2 μmol/L). 

On the other hand, by using architectures that consider spatial correlations between pixels and 

by embedding the governing SV equation directly into the deep learning process, we arrived at a 

framework that is both accurate and interpretable. Specifically, a Vision Transformer (ViT) with a 

physics loss component achieved a state -of -the -art MAE of ~2 μmol/L (when training and testing 

datasets were chosen in chronological order) under accelerated fouling over a 14 -day period. 

Additionally, using a Deep Ensemb le methodology combined with the ability to generate spatial 

heatmaps of physics loss and attention provide a dual mechanism for sensor self -diagnostic 

capabilities. This enables future systems to flag not just where they are rapidly degrading (via 

physics residuals) but also how much to trust their current output (via uncertainty). We were also 

able to show the generalizability of the proposed framework by applying it on a similar setup with 

a different configuration and different conditions. Together, the se advances yield a sensing 

platform that remains robust even under fouling conditions. 

By combining low -cost, self -assembled films and accessible hardware with a powerful 

computational framework, we democratize access to high -performance environmental 

monitoring. Crucially, the proposed platform achieve s a ~50 -120 x improvement in cost -

efficiency compared to current industrial devices and is readily scalable; envisioned for a 

'deploy -and -retrieve' model where the entire sensor is housed in a self -contained package and 

deployed for a monitoring period and then collected for data offloading and refurbishment. This 

strategy aligns with the low -cost nature of the hardware, simplifies field logistics, eliminates the 

need for complex in -situ data transmission and allows for IOT (Internet -Of -Things) devices . Thus, 

large -scale network deployments on autonomous underwater vehicles become feasible , which 

in turn enable accurate, long -term ocean monitoring that is essential for forecasting climate 

tipping points. Future work should focus on oceanic deployment for longer periods to assess 

long -term stability and on -board self -calibration techniques using IOT devices. 21 

# Methods 

Film Fabrication 

The oxygen sensing film creation has been described in depth in a previous publication [33] and 

relies on self -assembly fabrication using the Breath Figure technique with Polystyrene as the 

encapsulation polymer and PtOEP as the oxygen sensitive dye. 

Experimental Setup 

We used a Raspberry Pi, an HD Pi Camera, a UV LED (395nm – Wurth Elektronik), and Pyroscience 

DO sensor (Pico -O2 -SUB) as the ground truth sensor measurements. The 14 -day algae growth 

experiment was performed by purchasing one type of algae (Chlorella) alon g with the appropriate 

fertilizers. The industry sensor was cleaned every 2 days with DI water, inserted into the same 

position and was at the same height in the water enclosure as the placement of the films. The 

biofouling was not only related to the dark ening of the pixels as seen from the camera because 

most of the occlusions occurred on the side of the film that was not facing the camera or the UV 

LED and the film is opaque ( Fig. 1 ) (see also the biofouling quantification section below). The 

positioning of the film compared to the UV LED and camera was chosen to mirror the setup of 

industrial sensors. The temperature was monitored using the DB9 temperature sensor 

connected to the Raspberry Pi. From the 14 day -period, 13 datasets from 13 separate days wer e

used to train and test the model. The proposed optoelectronic configuration achieved a ~50 -120x 

cost improvement factor compared to current industrial solutions. 

All neural network architectures, including the CNN, PINN, and ViT models, were implemented 

using the PyTorch deep learning framework. To handle the high computational demands of the 

Vision Transformer and the physics -informed loss calculations, model trai ning and inference 

were hardware -accelerated using an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 5070 GPU with 12 GB of dedicated 

VRAM. In some instances, procedures were accelerated using NVIDIA A100 GPUs on the 

University College London (UCL) computing cluster Myriad. Training was further accelerated 

using Automatic Mixed Precision (AMP) to optimise memory consumption. 

Experimental Methodology 

To establish a robust performance baseline and demonstrate the limitations of existing 

approaches, we first evaluated a spectrum of conventional and machine learning calibration 

techniques using only the red -channel pixel intensities, which most closely co rrespond to the 

emission spectrum of PtOEP. Then, CNN and ViT -based models were implemented and all 3 RGB 

channels were included. Each video frame was downsampled to 2 fps and 48x48 pixels from 30 

fps and 1920x1080, respectively, due to the computational r esources available and the 

processing time of the frames. For context, optimizing a single ViT model using LOOCV required 

approximately 7 minutes per training epoch (totalling roughly 3 hours for a complete 25 -epoch 

cycle) with the hardware available (NVID IA GeForce RTX 5070 12 GB VRAM). This corresponds to 

training with 12 days of historical calibration data (~24,000 frames) and testing on 1 day (~2000 

frames). 

The ground truth data was obtained in parallel from a DO sensor (O2 Pico -Sub Pyroscience) and 

the calibration was performed in 5 stable DO concentrations achieved using mass flow 

controllers set at 0, 5, 10, 15, and 20 V/V %. During the 14 -days of algae gr owth, we performed a 

calibration each day and used the frames from 13 videos (each from a separate day) for training 

and testing the models. To reduce the random systematic error from the industry sensor we 22 

resampled the ground truth data using their average every 10s (step averaging), which is expected 

to be true for a constant flow from the mass flow controllers (with an accuracy of 0.1% V/V). This 

was a critical part of the conditioning of the input ground truth signal to avoid optimizing the ML 

model on the Pyroscience sensor noise. 

All methods were assessed using a stringent LOOCV protocol [39], where each calibration from 

a separate day was held out as an unseen test set and corresponded to a different set of weights 

for the final ML model. This constitutes the closest scenario to a real -world application where we 

would employ a new calibration methodology to predict an entire unseen dataset (corresponding 

in this case to a single day/calibration video) and thus was considered the most relevant way of 

organising the testing and train ing of the model. Fundamentally, the nature of algae growth on 

the surface of the sensor is not homogeneous in time or space and thus the average of all 

possible combinations of days for training and testing is a more accurate depiction of the 

implementati on of this sensing framework. Nonetheless, a purely chronological analysis has 

also been included. Additionally, we highlighted the scalability of the proposed framework by 

splitting the dataset into training and testing with 10 different ratios (keeping t he total the same, 

13), using randomly selected experimental data sets of each day, to measure the effect of 

training size versus testing on the final test MAE, as a metric of scalability ( Fig. 7E ). 

Realistic Temporal Validation and Independent Experimental Verification 

The models were initially compared in the idealised scenario by choosing to report the best test 

MAE achieved over 35 training epochs, with the goal of reporting the best possible results to 

compare with the best ViT model. While the LOOCV provides a robus t baseline, the metric of best 

test MAE performance from a set number of epochs does not directly translate in a realistic 

deployment scenario. Thus, we further validated the framework’s ability to generalize temporally 

under strict "deploy -and -forget" con ditions, where the model must predict future sensor 

performance based solely on chronologically past data. 

To achieve this, we first re -evaluated the primary dataset using a strict chronological split: the 

first 11 experimental days were used for training, the 12th day served as a validation set for 

hyperparameter tuning and early stopping, and the 13th (final) day was reserved as a completely 

unseen test set. Notably , unlike the LOOCV approach where the best model might be selected 

based on test performance, here the model selection was determined exclusively by the training 

and validation set metrics. This ens ures no "data leakage" from the future occurs, simulating a 

realistic scenario where the sensor must extrapolate the biofouling trend without access to 

future calibration points. Additionally, this was replicated with all possible number of training 

days t o measure how fast the model would converge to lower test MAEs based on the available 

training days, again using a validation set (of a single experiment day) directly after the training 

dataset. 

Crucially, to rigorously test the transferability of the framework to a completely new physical 

setup, we also conducted a second, independent 4 -day experiment using a newly fabricated 

sensing film, a different setup configuration, and a fresh batch of unf ertilised algae. This "blind" 

experiment was designed to assess the framework's robustness against variations in film 

fabrication and distinct biofouling growth rates. The dataset was split chronologically, using the 

first 3 days for training and the 4th d ay for testing. For model selection, we reserved a 5% uniform 

sample from the training days as a validation set. We applied the Classical global averaging, 

PCNN, and Vision Transformer (PViT) models to this independent dataset. This approach 23 

confirms that our results are not artifacts of overfitting to a specific experimental realization but 

represent a generalised capability of the physics -informed framework in tandem with the 

transformer architecture to adapt to novel environments and unseen sensor films. 

Biofouling Quantification 

We quantified relative biomass using crystal violet (CV) staining on seven coated acrylic “sister” 

samples collected every two days. Each sample was (i) rinsed in deionised (DI) water to remove 

loosely attached algae, (ii) fixed in glutaraldehyde to prese rve the formed biofilm, (iii) stained with 

CV for 2 min, and (iv) rinsed again with DI water. The bound dye was then eluted by submerging 

the sample in a vial of alcohol for 1 h. The resulting dye/alcohol solutions were analysed by UV –

Vis spectroscopy (Fig . 9). All solution volumes (rinses, fixative, stain, and solvent) were kept 

constant across samples to ensure reproducibility. 

The Crystal Violet staining in conjunction with UV -Vis measurements were a clear indication that 

organic biomass adhered onto the film and increased in size throughout the duration of the 

experiment ( Fig.9D ). Specifically, the Crystal Violet staining was used to quantify the biofilm 

formation, as a thin membrane adhered on top of the phosphorescent film, and did not quantify 

the optically -occluding macro -aggregates (large pieces of visibly green algae), whic h were rinsed 

off the surface of the samples with DI water. 

This was different to the visualisation capabilities of the camera. In detail, due to: i) the 

configuration of the setup where the phosphorescent film is placed on the other side of the 

camera and is observed through a UV -transparent acrylic, ii) the opaqu e nature of the 

phosphorescent film, and iii) the transparency of the biofilm; the camera could not visualize 

directly the biofouling on the sensor surface, but only the occlusions on the uncoated acrylic. 

Moreover, the occlusions in the form of macro -aggr egates and bubbles differed depending on 

the day of experiment and the specific frame within the calibration video (as confirmed from 

visual inspections). Thus, there was no gradual and steady increase observed in the regions that 

the biofouling and confid ence masks "avoided" during the 14 -day experiment like in the case of 

the Crystal Violet measurements. In essence, the masks were able to capture the average 

biofouling levels of the sensor films for each day of the experiment, by visualizing the 

performan ce of the pixels from the combination of visual occlusions and phosphorescence 

emitted. 

Thus, for future studies, we suggest that two separate cases are investigated independently: i) 

the biofouling occurs on the film and is directly visualised by the camera, as the film and the 

camera are placed directly facing each other, and ii) the film will be on the other side of the 

transparent acrylic compared to the camera (as it was during this experiment), but measures are 

taken so that no occlusions occur between the camera and the film - with only the transparent 

acrylic existing in the space be tween them. In the latter, we essentially eliminate the ability of the 

camera to "visualize" the occlusions on the surface of the film prior to any DO calibration. In 

addition, spectroscopic techniques should be investigated using different wavelengths of LED to 

potentially identify the biofouling directly, which could potentially increase the prediction 

accuracy of the model. 24 

Figure 9: Biofouling quantification. 

Images of the film applied on top of the transparent UV acrylic (A) without CV staining, (B) with 

staining from the second day of fouling and (C) the last day of algae growth. (D) A plot from the 

UV -Vis measurements of each sample (per 2 days) where the max absorbance is plotted against 

the day of the experiment. 

Physics derived equations 

1. Stern –Volmer Relationship and Sensitivity ( 𝑲 𝑺𝑽 )

The sensitivity of the sensor is defined by the Stern –Volmer constant, K sv , derived from the 

linear form of the SV equation. It represents the slope of the relationship between the 

quenched intensity ratio and the oxygen concentration: 

𝐼 ₀ / 𝐼 = 1 + 𝐾 𝑆𝑉  · [𝑂 ₂] (4𝑎 ) 

> •

𝐼 ₀: phosphorescence intensity in the absence of oxygen ([O₂] = 0)  

> •

𝐼 : phosphorescence intensity at a given oxygen concentration [O₂]  

> •

𝐾 𝑆𝑉 : Stern –Volmer quenching constant (μmol ⁻¹· L), a measure of sensitivity 

For heterogeneous environments, a non -linear two -site model is often used to account for 

multiple quenching domains with different sensitivities: 25 

𝐼 0

𝐼 = 𝑓 1 (1 + 𝐾 𝑆𝑉 ,1 · [𝑂 2])−1 + 𝑓 2(1 + 𝐾 𝑆𝑉 ,2 · [𝑂 2])−1 (4𝑏 ) 

> •

𝑓 1 , 𝑓 2: fractional contributions of each site ( 𝑓 1 , + 𝑓 2 = 1) 

> •

Ksv ,₁, K sv ,₂: Stern –Volmer constants for each quenching site 

if you replace  𝑓 2 and  𝑓 2(the fractional components) with a single parameter  𝑎 representing the 

fractional contribution of the first component, and  (1 − 𝑎 )for the second, the Stern –Volmer 

relationship becomes: 

𝐼 0

𝐼  = 𝑎 (1 + 𝐾 SV,1 [𝑂 2])−1 + (1 − 𝑎 )(1 + 𝐾 SV, 2 [𝑂 2])−1 (4c) 

where:  

> •

𝑎 ∈ [0,1] is the fractional contribution of the first component, with  (1 − 𝑎 )representing 

the second. 

2. Dynamic Range (DR) 

The dynamic range is the total change in signal intensity across the measured concentration 

range, indicating the operational span of the sensor. 

𝐷𝑦𝑛𝑎𝑚𝑖𝑐 𝑅𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒 = 𝐼 𝑚𝑎𝑥 − 𝐼 𝑚𝑖𝑛 (5)

• 𝐼 𝑚𝑎𝑥 : mean intensity at the lowest oxygen concentration (typically approaching I₀) 

• 𝐼 𝑚𝑖𝑛 : mean intensity at the highest oxygen concentration measured 

3. Maximum Intensity (I₀) 

The maximum, or unquenched, intensity is a fundamental parameter representing the 

sensor’s baseline signal in an oxygen -free environment. 

𝐼 ₀ = 𝐼 𝑎𝑠 [𝑂 ₂] → 0 (6)

• In practice,  𝐼 ₀ is determined experimentally at zero oxygen concentration or estimated as a 

fitting parameter from the SV equation. 

4. LOD (Limit of Detection) 

The Limit of Detection is the lowest oxygen concentration that can be reliably distinguished 

from a zero -concentration sample. Following IUPAC, it is calculated as: 

𝐿𝑂𝐷 = (3 · 𝜎 )

𝑚 (7)

• 𝜎 : standard deviation of repeated intensity measurements at zero (or near -zero) oxygen 

concentration 

• m: sensitivity (slope) of the calibration curve ( 𝑚 = 𝐾 𝑆𝑉  for the SV model) 

5. R² (Coefficient of Determination) 

The coefficient of determination, R², quantifies the goodness -of -fit of the linear SV model to 

the experimental data. 26 

𝑅 2 = 1 − 𝛴 (𝑦 ᵢ − ŷᵢ)2

𝛴 (𝑦 ᵢ − ȳ)2 (8)

• 𝑦 ᵢ = 𝐼 ₀/𝐼 − 1 : observed value 

• ŷᵢ = 𝐾 𝑆𝑉 · [𝑂 ₂] : predicted value from the fit 

• ȳ: mean of observed y values 

• n: number of data points 

CNN training 

For the CNN architecture patterns (see Supplementary Information section S4 for full details). 

we used a ResNet -18 [40] backbone and a Convolutional Block Attention Module (CBAM) [41] 

block to highlight informative regions. The architecture leverages the ResNet -18 backbone, pre -

trained on ImageNet, to extract rich hierarchical features from the raw 48x48x3 pixel sensor 

images. We also integrated a CBAM to “guide” the model to learn and spatially focus on the most 

informative regions of the sensor film, dyn amically adapting to heterogeneous fouling. This 

network processes the full spatial information of the sensor frames, alongside ambient 

temperature, through a final regression head to predict the dissolved oxygen concentration. For 

the training we used Ada mW optimizer [42] with MSE loss, automatic mixed precision (AMP), 

gradient accumulation and clipping, optional cosine LR scheduling, early stopping for faster 

results, and data augmentation (random horizontal and vertical flips). Hyperparameters 

(learning rate, weight decay, backbone, physics loss -when applied) are tuned with Optuna for a 

subset of the entire data set (30%). Evaluation is once more rigorous using LOOCV (entire 

experiment days held out). This protocol rigorously tests the model's ability to generalize to 

completely unseen temporal conditions and fouling states, preventing any data leakage between 

training and testing. 

Vision Transformer Training and Uncertainty Quantification 

To capture global spatial dependencies beyond the local receptive fields of CNNs, we replaced 

the ResNet -18 backbone with a Vision Transformer (ViT, vit_small_patch16_224) [38], pre -trained 

on ImageNet (see Supplementary Information section S5 for full det ails). The ViT divides each 

input frame into a grid of patches and uses self -attention to weigh every patch relative to all 

others simultaneously, providing a holistic representation of the sensor surface, which is 

particularly advantageous for modelling d iffuse biofouling patterns. The global CLS token is 

concatenated with the temperature reading and passed to a regression head for DO prediction, 

while the spatial patch tokens are decoded into the biofouling mask and physics confidence 

map. The architectur e comprises four specialised heads whose functions are summarised in 

Table S1 in the Supplementary Information document. The network was trained with the dual -

objective loss (equation 1), using AdamW with hyperparameters tuned via Optuna; images were 

upsam pled from 48×48 to 224×224 via bilinear interpolation to meet the ViT input requirements. 

To quantify predictive uncertainty, we implemented a deep ensemble methodology [43]: for each 

cross -validation fold, an ensemble of identical PViT models with differe nt random weight 

initialisations was trained, with the ensemble mean serving as the final prediction and the 

standard deviation as a direct measure of model confidence. 27 

The proposed sensing paradigm is well suited for a distributed Cloud -Edge IoT architecture: the 

computationally intensive Deep Ensemble ViT training is executed on centralized, high -

performance hardware and once the robust, physics -informed weights are fin alized, the static 

model is compiled and pushed to a microcontroller (e.g. Raspberry Pi) at the edge. The edge 

device is only responsible for Inference (a forward pass), which is highly efficient, allowing the 

edge device to perform real -time, self -diagnos tic DO measurements and spatial uncertainty 

quantification locally, significantly reducing the bandwidth needed to transmit data. 

# Data availability 

The raw image data, processed datasets, and ground truth measurements required to reproduce 

the findings presented in this study are available from the corresponding author upon request 

and available to download from OSF. 

# Code availability 

The code with the models used in this work are accessible on GitHub .

# References 

[1] IPCC, 2023: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. 

Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, H. Lee and J. Romero (eds. )]. 

IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1 –34. 

[2] The Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS): https://goosocean.org/what -we -

do/framework/essential -ocean -variables/ 

[3] Global Climate Observing System (GCOS): https://gcos.wmo.int/ 

[4] Oschlies, A., Brandt, P., Stramma, L., & Schmidtko, S. Drivers and mechanisms of ocean 

deoxygenation. Nature Geoscience, 11(7), 467 –473 (2018). DOI: 10.1038/s41561 -018 -0152 -2

[5] Körtzinger, A., Riser, S. C., & Gruber, N. Oceanic oxygen: the oceanographer’s canary bird of 

climate change. ARGO Newsletter, 7 (June 2006), 2–3. 

https://argo.ucsd.edu/outreach/publications/argo -newsletters/ 

[6] Loriani, S. et al. Tipping points in ocean and atmosphere circulations. EGUsphere (2023). DOI: 

10.5194/egusphere -2023 -2589 

[7] Anderson, D. M., Glibert, P. M., & Burkholder, J. M. Harmful algal blooms and eutrophication: 

Nutrient sources, composition, and consequences. Estuaries, 25, 704 –726 (2002). 

[8] Wijffels, R. H., & Barbosa, M. J. An outlook on microalgal biofuels. Science, 329, 796 –799 

(2010). 

[9] Delauney, L., Compère, C., & Lehaitre, M. Biofouling protection for marine environmental 

sensors. Ocean Sci., 6, 503 –511 (2010). 

[10] Tengberg, A. et al. Evaluation of a lifetime -based optode to measure oxygen in aquatic 

systems. Limnol. Oceanogr.: Methods, 4, 7 –17 (2006). 28 

[11] Bittig, H. C. et al. Oxygen optode sensors: principle, characterization, calibration, and 

application in the ocean. Front. Mar. Sci., 4, 429 (2018). 

[12] Zeng, Liangpeng, et al. "Anti -fouling performance of hydrophobic hydrogels with unique 

surface hydrophobicity and nanoarchitectonics." Gels 8.7 (2022): 407. 

[13] Sullivan, Timothy, and Irene O’Callaghan. "Recent developments in biomimetic antifouling 

materials: A review." Biomimetics 5.4 (2020): 58. 

[14] Vourna, Polyxeni, et al. "Corrosion and Antifouling Behavior of a New Biocide -Free 

Antifouling Paint for Ship Hulls Under Both Artificially Simulated and Natural Marine 

Environment." Materials 18.13 (2025): 3095. 

[15] Santos -Simón, Mar, et al. "Assessment of the effectiveness of antifouling solutions for 

recreational boats in the context of marine bioinvasions." Marine Pollution Bulletin 200 (2024): 

116108. 

[16] Hu P, Xie Q, Ma C, Zhang G. Silicone -based fouling -release coatings for marine antifouling. 

Langmuir. 2020 Feb 4;36(9):2170 -83. 

[17] Guo, Ruixue, et al. "Research Advances in Low Surface Energy Antifouling Coatings for Ships 

With Structural Bionic Properties." Polymers for Advanced Technologies 36.3 (2025): e70146. 

[18] Jin, H., Wang, J., Tian, L., Gao, M., Zhao, J. and Ren, L., 2022. Recent advances in emerging 

integrated antifouling and anticorrosion coatings. Materials & Design, 213, p.110307. 

[19] Delgado, A., Briciu -Burghina, C. and Regan, F., 2021. Antifouling strategies for sensors used 

in water monitoring: review and future perspectives. Sensors, 21(2), p.389. 

[20] Wolfbeis, O. S. Luminescent sensing and imaging of oxygen: Fierce competition to the Clark 

electrode. BioEssays, 37, 921 –928 (2015). 

[21] Lee, J.C.M., Li, J.W., Cheng, K.F., Chen, J.X., Ciou, Y.S., Wang, J.H., Lu, M.C., Chen, Y.F. and 

Chiu, C.W., 2024. Facile fabrication and analysis of highly sensitive PtTFPP/carbon 

black/polystyrene oxygen -sensitive composite films for optical dissolv ed -oxygen sensor. ACS 

Applied Electronic Materials, 6(3), pp.1617 -1627. 

[22] Jiang, Z., Yu, X., & Hao, Y. Design and fabrication of a ratiometric planar optode for 

simultaneous imaging of pH and oxygen. Sensors, 17(6), 1316 (2017). 

[23] Quaranta, M., Borisov, S. M., & Klimant, I. Indicators for optical oxygen sensors. Bioanal. 

Rev., 4, 115 –157 (2012). 

[24] Rasmussen, R. E., Holst, G., Wenzhöfer, F., & Koren, K. Revisiting camera -based calibration 

of oxygen optodes: error sources, empirical alternatives, and practical guidelines for end -users. 

Preprint at SSRN (2025). DOI: 10.2139/ssrn.5352582 

[25] Li, C. et al. Planar optode: A two -dimensional imaging technique for studying spatial -

temporal dynamics of solutes in sediment and soil. Earth -Science Reviews, 197, 102916 (2019). 

[26] Koren, K., & Zieger, S. E. Optode based chemical imaging —possibilities, challenges, and new 

avenues in multidimensional optical sensing. ACS Sensors, 6(5), 1671 –1680 (2021). 

[27] Kühl, M., & Polerecky, L. Functional and structural imaging of phototrophic microbial 

communities and symbioses. Aquat. Microb. Ecol., 53, 99 –118 (2008). 29 

[28] Glud, R. N., Ramsing, N. B., & Revsbech, N. P. Planar optrodes: a new tool for fine -scale 

measurements of two -dimensional O₂ distribution in benthic communities. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser., 

140, 217 –226 (1996). 

[29] Borisov, S. M., & Klimant, I. Luminescent nanobeads for optical sensing and imaging of 

dissolved oxygen. Microchim. Acta, 164, 7 –15 (2009). 

[30] Salaris, N., Chen, W., Haigh, P., Caciolli, L., Giobbe, G.G., De Coppi, P., Papakonstantinou, 

I. and Tiwari, M.K., 2024. Nonwoven fiber meshes for oxygen sensing. Biosensors and 

Bioelectronics , 255 , p.116198. 

[31] Karniadakis, G. E. et al. Physics -informed machine learning. Nat. Rev. Phys., 3, 422 –440 

(2021). 

[32] Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., & Karniadakis, G. E. Physics -informed neural networks: A deep 

learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial 

differential equations. J. Comput. Phys., 378, 686 –707 (2019). 

[33] Baddoo, P. J. et al. Physics -informed dynamic mode decomposition. Proc. R. Soc. A, 

479(2271), 20220576 (2023). 

[34] Salaris, N., Haigh, P., Papakonstantinou, I., & Tiwari, M. K. Self -assembled porous polymer 

films for improved oxygen sensing. Sens. Actuators B, 374, 132794 (2023). 

[35] Ke, Guolin, Qi Meng, Thomas Finley, Taifeng Wang, Wei Chen, Weidong Ma, Qiwei Ye, and 

Tie -Yan Liu. "Lightgbm: A highly efficient gradient boosting decision tree." Advances in neural 

information processing systems 30 (2017). 

[36] Akiba, Takuya, Shotaro Sano, Toshihiko Yanase, Takeru Ohta, and Masanori Koyama. 

"Optuna: A next -generation hyperparameter optimization framework." In Proceedings of the 25th 

ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp . 2623 -2631. 

2019. 

[37] Ashish, Vaswani. "Attention is all you need." Advances in neural information processing 

systems 30 (2017): I. 

[38] Dosovitskiy, Alexey, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, 

Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani et al. "An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for 

image recognition at scale." arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 (2020).  

> [39]

Stone, Mervyn. "Cross ‐validatory choice and assessment of statistical predictions." Journal 

of the royal statistical society: Series B (Methodological) 36, no. 2 (1974): 111 -133. 

[40] He, Kaiming, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. "Deep residual learning for image 

recognition." In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 

pp. 770 -778. 2016. 

[41] Woo, Sanghyun, Jongchan Park, Joon -Young Lee, and In So Kweon. "Cbam: Convolutional 

block attention module." In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), 

pp. 3 -19. 2018. 

[42] Kingma, Diederik P. "Adam: A method for stochastic optimization." arXiv preprint 

arXiv:1412.6980 (2014). 30 

[43] Lakshminarayanan, Balaji, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. "Simple and scalable 

predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles." Advances in neural information 

processing systems 30 (2017).