Title: An ALE-Consistent Graph Neural Operator-Transformer Framework for Fluid-Structure Interaction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00937v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 00:08:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# An ALE-Consistent Graph Neural Operator-Transformer Framework for Fluid-Structure Interaction 

Shihang Zhao a, Martín Saravia b, Haokui Jiang a, Zhiyang Xue a, and Shunxiang Cao a,* 

> Institute for Ocean Engineering, Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518055, China Centro de Investigación en Mecánica Teórica y Aplicada, Universidad Tecnológica Nacional - CONICET, 11 de Abril 461, Bahía Blanca, Argentina

Abstract 

We propose an arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE)-consistent machine learning framework for long-term fluid-structure interaction (FSI) prediction on deforming unstructured meshes. Specifically, the fluid dynamics are modeled by a surrogate that combines a graph neural operator (GNO) with a vision Transformer (ViT) for spatiotemporal prediction, while a lightweight long short-term memory (LSTM) network predicts structural kinematics at the interface. The two surrogates are coupled through a standard partitioned procedure. Most importantly, kinematic compatibility at the moving interface is enforced via an ALE-consistent boundary-correction step that updates the fluid-side interface velocity with the predicted structural velocity at each coupling update, thereby improving near-interface accuracy and long-term rollout stability. To mitigate autoregressive error accumulation, a two-stage training strategy is adopted, consisting of single-step supervised pretraining followed by long-term autoregressive fine-tuning. The proposed framework is validated on the benchmark problem of a flexible beam vibration in the wake of a cylinder. Results demonstrate accurate phase-consistent predictions over long rollouts and robust generalization under inlet-profile variations in both interpolation and extrapolation settings. Systematic ablation studies further assess the respective contributions of the ViT module, ALE-consistent boundary correction, and long-term training to predictive accuracy and rollout robustness. 

Keywords: Fluid-structure interaction, Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian, Graph neural operator, Vision Transformer, Prediction 

1. Introduction 

Fluid-structure interaction (FSI) plays a central role in a wide range of engineering applications, particularly in ocean, aerospace, and biomedical engineering [ 1–4 ]. Some emerging applications, such as digital twin [ 5], uncertainty quantification [ 6],and real-time active control for FSI [ 7–11 ], increasingly demand fast and repeatable FSI simulations. However, conventional high-fidelity FSI simulations are fundamentally ill-suited for such time-critical scenarios due to their high computational cost. This limitation lies in the multi-physics nature of FSI problems, which requires both tight temporal coupling between fluid and structural solvers as well as accurate spatial treatment of deforming fluid–structure interfaces. Specifically, the partitioned procedure is widely used for two-way FSI coupling, in which the fluid and structural subproblems are solved separately and synchronized through interfacial data exchange at each time step [ 12 ]. 

> arXiv:2605.00937v1 [physics.flu-dyn] 1 May 2026

However, achieving stable and convergent solutions generally requires multiple sub-iterations, with the computational overhead increasing markedly in the presence of strong added-mass effects [ 13 , 14 ]. As for spatial coupling, conventional FSI simulations commonly rely on arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) method [ 15 ] to represent the motion and deformation of fluid–structure interfaces. By employing body-fitted, deforming meshes that moves with the structure, ALE enables accurate enforcement of interface conditions and superior near-wall accuracy. However, the need to continuously update body-fitted moving meshes substantially increases computational complexity. These computational bottlenecks motivate the development of FSI surrogate models that retain engineering-level accuracy while substantially reducing computational expense. Recent advances in data-driven modeling offer a promising direction toward accelerating FSI simulation [ 16 –18 ]. Existing studies have primarily explored two methodological directions: (i) reduced-order models (ROMs) that leverage physics-based modeling and dimensionality reduction [ 19 – 21 ], and (ii) end-to-end machine learning (ML) frameworks that directly learn predictive mappings from data [ 17 ]. ROMs typically extract dominant spatial modes from experiments or high-fidelity simulations and project the high-dimensional fluid/structure evolution onto a low-dimensional dynamic system. This reduction enables substantial computational acceleration while retaining physical interpretability [ 19 ]. Representative examples include Galerkin projected POD models [ 22 ], balanced truncation POD for input-output systems [ 23 ], and Koopman operator-based spectral representations that seek linear embedding of nonlinear dynamics [ 10 , 24 ]. Such ROMs often perform well for periodic or weakly nonlinear responses and within small perturbation regimes, where the dominant dynamics can be captured by a compact subspace. However, practical FSI problems frequently involves strong nonlinearities, including large structural deformation, vortex shedding, and abrupt variations of unsteady loads. Under these conditions, the relevant low-dimensional subspace may vary significantly with operating parameters, leading to a trade-off between accuracy and robustness. Moreover, ROMs construction and closure typically rely on explicit use of governing equations, projection formulations, and empirical closure terms [ 17 , 19 ]. As a result, their performance can be highly sensitive to the specific configuration and parameter range, limiting their transferability and generalization across different flow regimes. In contrast, ML approaches, particularly deep learning, aim to learn nonlinear mappings from high-dimensional system states to future responses in an end-to-end manner, leveraging automatic feature extraction and fast inference [ 17 ]. Representative models include encoder–decoder and sequence-learning architectures built on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), recurrent units, or attention mechanisms [ 25 –27 ]. Once trained, such models can provide rapid predictions at very low computational cost, which has driven their success in complex flow predicting [ 28 , 29 ], structural response estimation [3, 30], and FSI surrogate modeling [31, 32]. However, ML-based FSI surrogates still face two fundamental bottlenecks that limit their applicability in engineering problems. The first is the accumulation of autoregressive errors and the associated phase drift in long-term rollouts, a pervasive issue in unsteady flow prediction and coupled dynamical systems that often leads to instability over time [ 33 ]. The second arises from the deforming fluid-structure interface, which leads to geometric non-stationarity and strict interfacial constraints. Beyond learning the separate evolutions of the fluid and structural states themselves, the surrogate must continuously satisfy kinematic compatibility and dynamic equilibrium at the moving interface, substantially increasing the difficulty of learning and generalization [ 34 ]. These challenges become particularly severe in non-periodic and strongly transient regimes, where error accumulation is amplified. Consequently, most existing studies 2still focus primarily on periodic or quasi-periodic responses [ 35 –39 ], while attempts to predict non-periodic dynamics remain limited and the accuracy and stability in strongly transient phases are often insufficient [26, 40]. To mitigate autoregressive error accumulation, several strategies have been explored. One class of approaches seeks to regularize temporal evolution by embedding numerical discretization operators, such as finite-difference or finite-volume schemes, into neural networks to incorporate physical priors [ 26 ]. While such methods can suppress error growth, they are often sensitive to data noise and discretization consistency. An alternative strategy is to predict multiple time steps per inference to reduce the number of recursive evaluations [ 41 , 42 ]. This approach has proven effective in predicting unsteady flow dynamics with prescribed structural motion. However, in two-way coupled FSI, where interface motion must be updated sequentially in response to evolving fluid loads, the use of fixed multi-step prediction may lead to interface inconsistencies and reduced coupling stability. A more promising approach is to adopt long-term training in which the model is explicitly exposed to its own error propagation during optimization [ 26 ]. By minimizing accumulated multi-step errors over a finite rollout window, this approach directly learns to suppress error amplification along the coupling feedback chain, rather than optimizing only one-step local errors. Therefore, it is better aligned with the closed-loop, autoregressive nature of FSI. Nevertheless, optimizing long-term objectives from scratch remains challenging. When the initial model is insufficiently accurate, autoregressive inputs can rapidly drift away from the training distribution, leading to unstable gradients and poor convergence or training collapse. To address this challenge, we adopt a two-stage training protocol that is more consistent with engineering practice. Specifically, single-step supervised pretraining is first employed to obtain a reliable initialization with strong local accuracy. The model is then fine-tuned using long-term autoregressive training, enabling it to resist error accumulation and phase drift while preserving one-step fidelity. This staged strategy significantly improves convergence stability and long-term predictive performance. To address the second challenge associated with deforming interfaces, existing studies have primarily explored four directions. A straightforward method is to combine learning models with immersed boundary methods to avoid mesh deformation [ 26 , 43 ]. However, the incorporation of interface information still relies on nonconforming boundary treatments and interpolation, which can introduce near-wall bias and degrade the accuracy of load transfer across the interface. An alternative line of work seeks to project unstructured data onto structured grids or unified latent representations [ 25 , 44 ]. This strategy enables the use of image-based networks, but it suffers from robustness issue of interfacial coupling. Even small mapping errors in forces, displacements and velocities at the interface can directly contaminate near-wall pressure and be amplified through the coupled feedback. Another class of methods preserves an Eulerian grid structure through geometric mappings such as mesh unfolding [ 45 ]. While effective for relatively regular geometries, their scalability is limited for the unstructured or adaptive meshes commonly encountered in engineering applications [ 25 ]. In contrast to the approaches described above, a more principled solution is to construct graph representations directly on the original discretization and perform graph-based learning on unstructured meshes [ 27 , 46 –48 ]. By operating on the original nodes, these methods naturally encode geometric and topological information without requiring mesh regularization or geometric remapping. In particular, graph neural operators (GNOs) have demonstrated clear advantages for flow modeling under such settings [ 34 , 49 , 50 ]. However, most existing graph-based approaches still focus on short-term prediction or flow evolution under prescribed structural motion [ 36 ], and are therefore not directly applicable to fully two-way coupled FSI problems. 3Motivated by these limitations, we develop an ALE-consistent graph neural operator-Transformer framework for fast prediction of FSI problems involving large deformation of flexible structures. Specifically, the fluid dynamics is modeled by a hybrid surrogate that combines a GNO defined on unstructured meshes for spatial modeling with a vision Transformer (ViT)-based spatiotemporal predictor. Meanwhile, the structural boundary kinematics are predicted using a lightweight long short-term memory (LSTM) network, leveraging the relatively low-dimensional nature of the structural response to enable efficient inference. The fluid and structural predictors are coupled through the standard ALE-based partitioned procedure, augmented by an ALE-consistent boundary correction: at each coupling update, the fluid-side interface velocity is corrected by the predicted structural interface velocity, thereby enforcing kinematic compatibility at the moving interface. To mitigates long-term error accumulation and phase drift, a two-stage training protocol is employed, which consists of single-step pretraining followed by long-term autoregressive fine-tuning. The proposed framework is validated on the benchmark problem of a flexible beam vibration in the wake of a cylinder [ 51 ]. Both periodic and non-periodic FSI regimes are considered, and the generalization performance is further assessed under inlet-profile variations through interpolation and extrapolation tests. In addition, ablation studies are conducted to quantify the respective contributions of the ViT-based temporal modeling, the ALE-consistent boundary correction, and long-term autoregressive fine-tuning to rollout stability and near-boundary prediction fidelity. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the governing equations and the proposed framework. Section 3 reports the numerical results and ablation analyses, including the predictions in the non-periodic regime. Section 4 summarizes the main conclusions. 

2. Methodology 

This section describes the physical model and the proposed GNO-ViT framework. We first present the ALE-based governing equations for FSI, which are used to generate the datasets and define the interface constraints. The hybrid surrogate architecture and its ALE-consistent coupling workflow are then described, including the boundary-correction step that enforces interfacial kinematic compatibility. Finally, the two-stage training protocol adopted to stabilize rollouts and mitigate error accumulation is detailed. 

2.1. Problem formulation 

We consider the classical FSI benchmark of a flexible beam vibration in the wake of a cylinder [ 51 ] (Figure 1). The FSI system consists of a fluid subproblem, a structure subproblem, a mesh-update problem, and interface conditions [ 10 ]. Specifically, the fluid dynamics is governed by the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, which are formulated in an arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian framework. 

∇ · 𝚽 (η𝑒 ) u 𝑓 

 = 0, in Ω 𝑓 , (1) 

𝜌 𝑓 𝐽 (η𝑒 ) 𝜕 u 𝑓 

𝜕𝑡 + 𝜌 𝑓 

(∇ u 𝑓 ) 𝚽 (η𝑒 ) 

u 𝑓 − 𝜕 η𝑒 

𝜕𝑡 



− ∇ · 𝚺 (u 𝑓 , 𝑝 𝑓 , η𝑒 ) = 0, in Ω 𝑓 , (2) where η𝑒 is the displacement field describing the deformation of the fluid mesh, u 𝑓 , 𝜌 𝑓 , 𝑝 𝑓 

are the fluid velocity, density, and pressure, respectively. 𝚽 (η𝑒 ) = 𝐽 (η𝑒 )  I + ∇ η𝑒 

−1 is the ALE deformation operator and 𝐽 (η𝑒 ) = det  I + ∇ η𝑒 

 is the Jacobian of the mapping. The first 4Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor for the fluid is given by 

𝚺 (u 𝑓 , 𝑝 𝑓 , η𝑒 ) =



−𝑝 𝑓 I + 𝜇 𝑓 

𝐽 (η𝑒 )

(∇ u 𝑓 ) 𝚽 (η𝑒 ) + (∇ u 𝑓 )T𝚽 (η𝑒 )T 

𝚽 (η𝑒 )T, (3) where 𝜇 𝑓 is the fluid dynamic viscosity. The structural dynamics is modeled by a compressible Saint-Venant-Kirchhoff (SVK) model described in the Lagrangian framework, which reads: 

𝜌 𝑠 

𝜕 2η𝑠 

𝜕𝑡 2 − ∇ · 

h

F(η𝑠 ) S(η𝑠 )

i

= 0, in Ω𝑠 , (4) where η𝑠 denote the structure displacement field, 𝜌 𝑠 is the structural density, and F(η𝑠 ) = I + ∇ η𝑠 

is the deformation gradient. and S(η𝑠 ) is the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor given by 

S(η𝑠 ) = 𝜆 𝑠 tr  E(η𝑠 )I + 2𝜇 𝑠 E(η𝑠 ). (5) where 𝜆 𝑠 and 𝜇 𝑠 are the Lamé parameters, E(η𝑠 ) = 12

F(η𝑠 )TF(η𝑠 ) − I is the Green-Lagrange strain. To smoothly extend the interface displacement into the interior fluid mesh under potentially large deformations, a standard ALE approach solves the mesh-extension problem with interfacial continuity: 

∇ · 𝚺 𝑒 (η𝑒 ) = 0, in Ω𝑒 , (6) 

η𝑒 = η𝑠 , on Γbeam , (7) where 𝚺 𝑒 denotes the chosen extension operator and Ω𝑒 is the interior of the deformable fluid-mesh domain, and Γbeam denotes the wetted surface of the beam. In our implementation, the fluid mesh is updated via Gmsh remeshing driven by the updated interface boundary points, so the continuity in Eq. (7) is satisfied by construction. The fluid and structure domains are coupled on the interface through kinematic and dynamic conditions: 

u 𝑓 − 𝜕 η𝑒 

𝜕𝑡 = 0, on Γbeam , (8) 

𝚺 (u 𝑓 , 𝑝 𝑓 , η𝑒 ) n −

h

F(η𝑠 ) S(η𝑠 )

i

n = 0, on Γbeam , (9) where n denotes the outward unit normal vector on the structural surface. The first condition enforces velocity continuity at the interface and the second ensures traction equilibrium. Eqs. (6) ,(7) , (8) and (9) provide the physical basis for the ALE-consistent boundary correction used in our developed framework. To interface with the data representation used in the developed framework, we introduce the following shorthand notation for fluid mesh deformation and on the FSI interface Γbeam :

d 𝑓 := η𝑒 , u 𝑓 = 𝜕 d 𝑓 

𝜕𝑡 , d𝑠 := η𝑠 Γbeam , u𝑠 = 𝜕 d𝑠 

𝜕𝑡 , (10) where (d 𝑓 , u 𝑓 ) denotes the mesh displacement and velocity field in the ALE formulation, while 

(d𝑠 , u𝑠 ) denote the interfacial structural displacement and velocity, respectively. Unless otherwise stated, the remainder of this paper adopts the shorthand in Eq. (10) . This is a notational change only and does not modify the governing equations or interface constraints. 5Figure 1: Schematic of the flexible beam (gray shaded region) clamped to a rigid cylinder (white circle) and immersed in a channel flow. 

2.2. Computational framework and ALE-consistent coupling scheme 

The proposed framework follows the data-exchange procedure of a conventional partitioned ALE-based FSI solver, while the computationally intensive fluid and structural sub-problems are replaced by trained surrogate models. For brevity, we refer to the proposed framework as GNO-ViT in the remainder of this paper. The overall ALE-consistent time-marching algorithm of the framework is illustrated in Figure 2 and summarized in Algorithm 1. For ease of description, we define the fluid state on the deforming mesh as 

𝐹 𝑡 =  q 𝑓 , d 𝑓 

𝑡 , where q 𝑓 = (u 𝑓 , 𝑝 𝑓 ) = (𝑢 𝑓 , 𝑣 𝑓 , 𝑝 𝑓 ), d 𝑓 = (𝑑𝑥 𝑓 , 𝑑𝑦 𝑓 ), (11) and the structural-interface state as 

𝑆 𝑡 =  u𝑠 , d𝑠 

𝑡 , where u𝑠 = (𝑢 𝑠 , 𝑣 𝑠 ), d𝑠 = (𝑑𝑥 𝑠 , 𝑑𝑦 𝑠 ). (12) To couple the fluid and structure, a staggered (Z-type) partitioned procedure is employed, in which the structural interface state is advanced ahead of the fluid by one time step (Algorithm 1). Specifically, the fluid prediction starts from state 𝐹 𝑡 , while the structural prediction starts from 

𝑆 𝑡 +1. This design allows the fluid surrogate at time 𝑡 to operate on the updated structural interface geometry at 𝑡 + 1, which is essential in an ALE formulation since the deforming fluid mesh must be updated before advancing the flow solution. Within each time step, the fluid mesh is first updated using the interfacial displacement from the structure at 𝑡 + 1 as: 

d𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

= M



d𝑡 +1

> 𝑠



, with d𝑡 +1  

> 𝑓 Γbeam

= d𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

. (13) Here, M (·) denotes mesh regeneration using Gmsh. To enforce the displacement continuity on the interface (Eq. (7) ), the interface is discretized using the structural boundary nodes. These nodes are directly prescribed as the boundary nodes of the fluid mesh in Gmsh. As a result, the fluid and structural discretizations coincide at the interface, and thus, no interpolation between fluid and structural boundary nodes is required. Given the updated mesh, the trained fluid surrogate model, denoted by N𝑓 , predicts the fluid state at 𝑡 + 1 from the current state as 

ˆq𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

= N𝑓 



q𝑡 𝑓 , d𝑡 𝑓 , d𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

, c



, (14) where ˆq𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

= ( ˆu 𝑓 , ˆ𝑝 𝑓 )𝑡 +1. The hat (ˆ·) denotes a predicted quantity, and c is a condition vector (illustrated in Figure 2) that encodes scenario information. Together with the mesh-update step in Eq. (13) , Eq. (14) yields the predicted fluid state at the next time step ˆ𝐹 𝑡 +1 = ( ˆq 𝑓 , d 𝑓 )𝑡 +1. A key challenge in learned partitioned coupling is the kinematic mismatch induced by staggered updates: 6the unconstrained fluid-side prediction may violate the interfacial kinematic compatibility in Eq. (8) . To enforce this constraint, we introduce an ALE-consistent interface velocity correction by imposing the structural interfacial velocity on the fluid interface, 

ˆu𝑡 +1  

> 𝑓 Γbeam

= u𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

, (15) which enforces as a pointwise assignment on Γbeam (without additional interpolation). This treatment mitigates slip-like interfacial inconsistencies that would otherwise bias the predicted pressure and shear, degrade load transfer, and amplify errors over long rollouts. Next, the flow-induced pressure on the wetted surface of the beam is then transferred to the structure model via 

𝑝 𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

= ˆ𝑝 𝑡 +1  

> 𝑓 Γbeam

, (16) and the structural surrogate N𝑠 updates the interfacial state, 

ˆ𝑆 𝑡 +2 = N𝑠 



u𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

, d𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

, 𝑝 𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

, c



. (17) This completes one time-step advance of the coupled system, i.e., given (𝐹 𝑡 , 𝑆 𝑡 +1), the procedure predicts the next fluid state ˆ𝐹 𝑡 +1, incorporating the boundary-corrected velocity, and the structural state ˆ𝑆 𝑡 +2. Subsequent time steps are obtained by recursively repeating this procedure. 

Algorithm 1 ALE-consistent GNO-Transformer framework for predicting FSI  

> 1:

Initialization: Provide initial fields and total rollout steps; the structure leads the fluid by one step.  

> 2:

𝐹 𝑡 = (q 𝑓 , d 𝑓 )𝑡 with q 𝑓 = (𝑢 𝑓 , 𝑣 𝑓 , 𝑝 𝑓 ), d 𝑓 = (𝑑𝑥 𝑓 , 𝑑𝑦 𝑓 ), 

> 3:

𝑆 𝑡 +1 = (u𝑠 , d𝑠 )𝑡 +1 with u𝑠 = (𝑢 𝑠 , 𝑣 𝑠 ), d𝑠 = (𝑑𝑥 𝑠 , 𝑑𝑦 𝑠 ), 

> 4:

total rollout steps 𝑇 . 

> 5:

for 𝑡 = 0, 1, . . . , 𝑇 − 1 do  

> 6:

Mesh update: Update the fluid mesh displacement using the structural boundary displacement.  

> 7:

d𝑡 +1

> 𝑓
> M

←−−− d𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

(e.g., Gmsh ) 

> 8:

Fluid prediction:  

> 9:

ˆq𝑡 +1

> 𝑓
> N𝑓

←−−−  q𝑡 𝑓 , d𝑡 𝑓 , d𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

, c loss 𝒕 +1 

> f
> 10:

ALE-consistent boundary correction: Correct the fluid-side interface velocity by the structural interface velocity.  

> 11:

˜u𝑡 +1  

> 𝑓 Γ

←− u𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

, ˜q𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

← ( ˜u 𝑓 , ˆ𝑝 𝑓 )𝑡 +1 

> 12:

Pressure transfer to structure:  

> 13:

𝑝 𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

←− ˆ𝑝 𝑡 +1  

> 𝑓 Γbeam
> 14:

Structure prediction:  

> 15:

𝑆 𝑡 +2 N𝑠 

←−−−  𝑆 𝑡 +1, 𝑝 𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

, c loss 𝒕 +2 

> s
> 16:

State update: q𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

← ˜q𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

, 𝑆 𝑡 +2 ← ( u𝑠 , d𝑠 )𝑡 +2. 

> 17:

end for 

2.3. Neural surrogates for fluid and structure 

The fluid states are defined on deforming unstructured meshes and are therefore not directly compatible with image-based architectures such as CNNs or Vision Transformer (ViT) [ 52 ]. To leverage Transformer-based spatiotemporal modeling while retaining the native unstructured discretization, we adopt a hybrid GNO-ViT-GNO pipeline (Figure 2, lower panel). In the 7Figure 2: ALE-consistent GNO–Transformer framework for long-horizon FSI prediction. (a) Overview of the autoregressive rollout, where the fluid surrogate (GNO–ViT) and the structure surrogate (LSTM) are advanced in a staggered manner and supervised by step-wise losses to suppress error accumulation. (b) Detailed schematic of one rollout cycle with red circled indices (1-6) corresponding to the six major steps in Algorithm 1: Initialization, Mesh update, Fluid prediction, ALE-consistent boundary correction, Pressure transfer to structure and Structure prediction. Dashed arrows indicate the coupling information exchanged between the two surrogates, and loss 𝑡 𝑓 and 

loss 𝑡 𝑠 denote the step-wise training losses used in the two-stage training protocol. 

8coupling workflow described in Section 2.2, the fluid-predict operator N𝑓 is implemented by this GNO-ViT-GNO surrogate. The overall mapping from the current unstructured state to the next-step flow variables can be written as 

ˆq𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

= P𝜓 



T𝜔 

 L𝜙 (q𝑡 𝑓 , d𝑡 𝑓 , d𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

), c

, (18) where L𝜙 is a GNO that lifts unstructured node fields to a structured-grid tensor, T𝜔 is a ViT module that performs global feature extraction and temporal advancement on patch tokens, and 

P𝜓 is a second GNO that projects the structured prediction back to the native unstructured mesh. Specifically, the lifting operators act on a mesh-induced graph 𝐺 𝑡 = (𝑉 𝑡 , 𝐸 𝑡 ), where 

𝑉 𝑡 = {1, . . . , 𝑁 𝑓 } indexes the 𝑁 𝑓 nodes of the deforming fluid mesh at time 𝑡 with coordinates 

x𝑡 𝑖 ∈ R2, and 𝐸 𝑡 contains undirected edges connecting mesh-neighboring nodes. Each node carries the feature vector f𝑡 𝑖 = [q𝑡 𝑓 ,𝑖 , d𝑡 𝑓 ,𝑖 , d𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓 ,𝑖

]:

X𝑡 = L𝜙 

 {x𝑡 𝑖 , f𝑡 𝑖 }𝑖 ∈𝑉 

, ˆq𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓 ,𝑖

= P𝜓 

 Y𝑡 +1, x𝑡 +1

> 𝑖

, 𝑖 ∈ 𝑉, (19) where X𝑡 is the structured representation provided to the ViT and Y𝑡 +1 denotes the ViT-predicted structured output. Although the arguments of N𝑓 in Eq. (14) are written in terms of (q 𝑓 , d 𝑓 ),geometric information enters through the mesh graph 𝐺 = (𝑉, 𝐸 ) and node coordinates x𝑖 used by L𝜙 and P𝜓 in Eq. (19); hence the coordinate dependence of N𝑓 is implicit. The ViT stage operates on the structured tensor via patch tokenization. Let X𝑡 be partitioned into 𝑁 patches {x𝑘 }𝑁 𝑘 =1 and embedded as 

z0 

> 𝑘

= W𝑒 vec (x𝑘 ) + e𝑘 , 𝑘 = 1, . . . , 𝑁, (20) where vec (·) flattens each patch into a vector, W𝑒 is a learnable linear embedding, and e𝑘 is a positional embedding. Each Transformer block applies multi-head self-attention, providing a global receptive field that is well suited for capturing long-term interactions and maintaining temporal coherence in autoregressive rollouts. Let Z0 = [z01, . . . , z0 

> 𝑁

] ∈ R𝑁 ×𝐷 𝑒𝑚𝑏 denote the stacked patch tokens, where 𝐷 emb is the token embedding dimension. The ViT updates the tokens as 

Z𝐿 = T𝜔 (Z0, c), (21) and produces the structured prediction through a linear head followed by unpatchifying: 

Y𝑡 +1 = Unpatch 



W𝑜 Z𝐿 + b𝑜 



, (22) where Y𝑡 +1 has the same structured-grid format as X𝑡 and is subsequently fed into the projection GNO P𝜓 in Eq. (19) . This design avoids mesh unfolding and preserves outputs on the evolving unstructured mesh required for near-wall fidelity. For the structure, the surrogate predicts only the interfacial kinematics on Γbeam . The structural update operator N𝑠 in Eq. (17) is implemented by a lightweight LSTM [ 53 ] applied to the ordered boundary-point sequence. We flatten the boundary-point kinematics into a 1D sequence using a vectorization operator B(·) and predict the interface state as 

s𝑡 +2 = LSTM 



s𝑡 +1, 𝑝 𝑡 +1 

> 𝑠

, c



, s𝑡 = B  𝑆 𝑡  , (23) which is reshaped back to obtain 𝑆 𝑡 +2. The predicted boundary serves three roles per time step: (i) it is used as the next interfacial state for autoregressive rollout, (ii) it determines the geometry for mesh update in Eq. (13) : regenerating the fluid mesh based on structure boundary (Figure 3), and (iii) it provides the interface velocity required by the boundary correction in Eqs. (15). 9Figure 3: Gmsh generate fluid mesh based on the structure boundary. 

2.4. Two-stage training for stable long-term rollouts 

Long-term FSI prediction is performed autoregressively, which makes stable rollout sensitive to error accumulation. To address this, we propose a two-stage training protocol. The loss of different time step 𝑡 in Figure 2 is the core of this method. We first establish short-term prediction accuracy through single-step pretraining, and then fine-tune the coupled surrogate under an autoregressive rollout objective to explicitly suppress error accumulation under closed-loop feedback. 

Stage I: Single-step pretraining (short-term). In the first stage, the fluid and structural models are trained for single-step prediction under teacher forcing. We use mean-squared errors evaluated on the fluid nodes and the structural boundary points, respectively: 

loss 𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

= 1

𝑁 𝑓 

ˆq𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

− q𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓
> 22

, loss 𝑡 +2 

> 𝑠

= 1

𝑁 𝑠 

ˆs𝑡 +2 − s𝑡 +2 22 , (24) where 𝑁 𝑓 denotes the number of fluid degrees of freedom used in the loss and 𝑁 𝑠 denotes the number of boundary points (after vectorization). In this stage, GNO-ViT and LSTM are optimized separately using loss 𝑡 +1 

> 𝑓

and loss 𝑡 +2 

> 𝑠

, respectively, yielding stable local predictors that provide a good initialization for long-term training. 

Stage II: Long-term autoregressive fine-tuning. In the second stage, we jointly fine-tune the fluid and structure models under an autoregressive rollout objective so that the coupled surrogate is explicitly trained on its own prediction feedback. Over a rollout window of length 𝑛 , the rollout follows the same ALE-consistent coupling procedure as inference (Algorithm 1), i.e., mesh update → fluid prediction → boundary correction → pressure transfer → structure prediction. The total loss is accumulated over the rollout window as 

loss total =

> 𝑛

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =0



loss 𝑡 +𝑖 𝑓 + 𝛼 · loss 𝑡 +𝑖 +1

> 𝑠



, (25) where 𝛼 = 10 balances the fluid and structure contributions. Due to GPU memory constraints, we set 𝑛 = 5 and apply truncated backpropagation through time over the rollout window. Unlike 

𝑆𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝐼 , Eq. (25) updates GNO-ViT and LSTM simultaneously, enabling the model to learn coupled long-term dependencies and to reduce cumulative error. Importantly, the ALE-consistent boundary correction is applied throughout the rollouts in this stage, aligning the training dynamics with inference-time coupling and preventing interface-induced kinematic inconsistencies from dominating the long-term loss. 10 3. Results and Discussion 

This section presents a comprehensive evaluation of the proposed framework, including predictions in both periodic and non-periodic regimes of the benchmark FSI problem, as well as ablation studies. 

3.1. Case settings 

The benchmark FSI problem (Figure 1) involves the flexible beam vibration in the wake of a cylinder, and has been widely used for validation of FSI solvers [ 27 , 36 , 54 ]. We follow the geometric configuration and material parameters reported in [27 ]. The computational domain is a channel of length 𝐿 = 2.5 m and height 𝐻 = 0.41 m . A rigid cylinder of diameter 

𝑑 = 0.1 m is centered at (0.2 m , 0.2 m ). A flexible beam of height ℎ = 0.02 m and length 

𝑙 = 0.35 m is attached to the rear side of the cylinder. The rightmost beam tip (point A) located at (0.6 m , 0.2 m ) is used as the monitoring point for structural motion. Boundary conditions are prescribed as follows. At the inlet Γin , a fourth-order velocity profile parameterized by (𝑐 1, 𝑐 2) is imposed. Let ¯𝑦 = 𝑦 /𝐻 ∈ [ 0, 1]. The inlet condition is written as 

𝑢 in (𝑦 ) = 𝑈 ∞

11 .7 ¯ 𝑦 (1 − ¯𝑦 )( ¯𝑦 − 𝑐 1)( ¯𝑦 − 𝑐 2)(1 − 𝑐 1)( 1 − 𝑐 2) , u 𝑓 = (𝑢 in , 0) on Γin , (26) where 𝑈 ∞ = 4 m /s. No-slip is applied on the top and bottom channel walls and on the cylinder boundaries 

u 𝑓 = 0, on Γtop ∪ Γbottom ∪ Γcwall , (27) and a reference pressure is imposed at the outlet, 

𝑝 𝑓 = 0, on Γout . (28) At the fluid-structure interface, the moving no-slip condition and traction equilibrium are enforced, consistent with Eqs. (8) and (9). For the material parameters, we adopt 𝜌 𝑓 = 1.0 × 10 3 kg /m3, 𝜌 𝑠 = 1.0 × 10 3 kg /m3,

𝜆 𝑠 = 4.0 × 10 6 Pa , and 𝜇 𝑠 = 2.0 × 10 6 Pa . With 𝑈 ∞ = 4.0 m /s, 𝜇 𝑓 = 1.0 Pa · s, all simulations are conducted at 𝑅𝑒 = 𝜌 𝑓 𝑈 ∞ 𝑑 𝜇 𝑓 = 400 .The dataset is constructed by varying the inlet profile in Eq. (26) . With 𝑐 1 = −4.0

fixed, we sample 𝑐 2 ∈ {− 4.0, −2.0, 0, 2.0, 4.0, 6.0}. The subset {− 4.0, 0, 2.0, 4.0} is used for training, while {− 2.0, 6.0} is reserved for testing under interpolation and extrapolation settings, respectively. In addition, predictions are evaluated in both the fully developed periodic regime and the underdeveloped transient (non-periodic) regime to assess long-term stability under oscillatory and strongly transient FSI dynamics. The training data are generated from high-fidelity FSI simulations, in which the fluid subproblem is solved using OpenFOAM and the structural subproblem using solidii , with the two solvers coupled via preCICE . To reduce training cost, the high-fidelity solution data are subsequently projected onto a substantially coarser mesh to form the training dataset. Specifically, the original fields computed on a mesh with approximately 3 × 10 4 nodes are mapped to a reduced representation with 1052 nodes. This projection significantly reduces GPU memory consumption during training while retaining the essential flow-structure dynamics, thereby demonstrating the practical feasibility of the proposed framework. All training experiments are performed on an NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU with 48 GB of memory. 11 Figure 4: Prediction and truth for the time histories of normalized transverse displacement at monitoring point A in the non-periodic regime: (a) 𝑦 /𝑑 for 𝑐 2 = −2; (b) 𝑦 /𝑑 for 𝑐 2 = 6.

3.2. FSI prediction with GNO-ViT 

The GNO-ViT framework is evaluated on the FSI benchmark problem across the transient non-periodic regime and the subsequent periodic regime. Here, the non-periodic regime denotes the evolution from the initial stage through the transient growth stage until the beam settles into a stable periodic vibration (referred to as the periodic regime ). This configuration is phase-sensitive under autoregressive prediction, such that errors incurred during the transient stage can propagate into the periodic stage. Therefore, accurate prediction in this setting requires not only capturing the transient dynamics but also maintaining phase consistency across regimes, making it a challenging test for long-term FSI prediction. Figure 4 shows the normalized displacement histories of 𝑦 -direction at probe A for 𝑐 2 = −2

(interpolation) and 𝑐 2 = 6 (extrapolation). Across both cases, the proposed framework accurately captures the displacement evolution from the initial low-amplitude oscillations, through the transient non-periodic regime, and into the periodic regime. The phase of the predicted vibration matches well with the reference over the entire time, demonstrating stable rollouts over the entire evolution. Noticeable discrepancies are primarily confined to the transient growth stage, where coupled forcing varies rapidly and the energy transfer of wake structure is strongly unsteady. In this regime, small differences in vortex-shedding onset and wake adjustment can lead to deviations in instantaneous load. This results in local amplitude mismatch while preserving the overall phase trajectory. Flow-field snapshots further support the above observations. Figure 5 compares the predicted and reference 𝑢 𝑓 at representative instants ( 𝑡 1, 𝑡 2, 𝑡 3 shown in Figure 4(a)) for the non-periodic case 𝑐 2 = −2. The framework accurately predicts the evolution of key flow features, including shear-layer morphology and vortex spacing, throughout the transient process. As the flow becomes strongly unsteady, discrepancies become more visible but remain largely localized near the trailing edge and in the near-wake region, where strong shear and nonlinear interactions dominate. Figure 6 presents the normalized displacement histories in the periodic regime for both the 𝑥 

and 𝑦 -direction for 𝑐 2 = −2 and 𝑐 2 = 6. In this regime, the predicted displacement show close agreement with the reference solution in both phase and amplitude, with smaller deviations than those observed during transient growth in Figure 4. To further examine the flow-field prediction in the periodic regime, three representative instants ( 𝑡 1, 𝑡 2, and 𝑡 3) are selected along the 𝑦 /𝑑 trajectories in Figure 6 (b) and (d), corresponding to different phases of the beam oscillation. Figure 7 shows the predicted flow fields (𝑢 𝑓 , 𝑣 𝑓 , 𝑝 𝑓 )

at time 𝑡 2 for the case 𝑐 2 = −2. Consistent with the displacement trend, the periodic flow-field 12 Figure 5: Comparison of prediction and truth of flow field 𝑢 𝑓 on non-periodic regime for 𝑐 2=-2 at time (a) 𝑡 1, (b) 𝑡 2,(c) 𝑡 3.

comparison at time 𝑡 2 (Fig. 7) shows higher fidelity and lower-magnitude, more localized errors for (𝑢 𝑓 , 𝑣 𝑓 , 𝑝 𝑓 ), indicating that the stabilized periodic dynamics are comparatively easier to predict than the transient development stage. Additional results for the predicted flow fields at 𝑡 1 and 𝑡 3 for 𝑐 2 = −2, as well as the corresponding comparisons for the extrapolative case 𝑐 2 = 6, are provided in Appendix A to further demonstrate generalization under both interpolation and extrapolation in the periodic regime. Supplementary Videos S1-S2 provide time-resolved animations comparing the predicted and reference velocity field 𝑢 𝑓 together with the corresponding structural deformation for 𝑐 2 = −2 and 𝑐 2 = 6 in periodic regime. The files are available via Zenodo [55]. Overall, the proposed framework achieves highly accurate predictions in the periodic regime while retaining strong predictive capability during transient growth. Crucially, phase fidelity is maintained from the non-periodic development stage into the stable limit cycle, supporting reliable long-term autoregressive rollouts; the remaining transient errors predominantly manifest as localized peak-amplitude mismatch rather than global phase drift. 

3.3. Ablation studies 

This section presents ablation studies to quantify the contributions of key components, including the ViT module, the ALE-consistent boundary correction, and the long-term training strategy. 

3.3.1. Role of ViT module and ALE-consistent boundary correction 

To assess the respective roles of the ViT module and the ALE-consistent boundary correction, two ablated variants of the proposed framework are considered. First, to isolate the contribution of 13 Figure 6: Prediction and truth for the time histories of normalized structural displacements at monitoring point A in the periodic regime: (a) 𝑥 /𝑑 for 𝑐 2 = −2; (b) 𝑦 /𝑑 for 𝑐 2 = −2; (c) 𝑥 /𝑑 for 𝑐 2 = 6; (d) 𝑦 /𝑑 for 𝑐 2 = 6.

Figure 7: Comparison of prediction and truth of flow field at time 𝑡 2 for 𝑐 2=-2: (a) 𝑢 𝑓 , (b) 𝑣 𝑓 , (c) 𝑝 𝑓 .

14 ViT module, the fluid prediction step in Algorithm 1 is modified by replacing the GNO-ViT block with a standalone GNO. Second, to evaluate the role of boundary correction, the ALE-consistent boundary correction step in Algorithm 1 is removed, such that the fluid velocity predicted by GNO-ViT is used directly without enforcing kinematic condition at the interface. This variant is referred to as GNO-ViT-noBM. To provide a controlled evaluation setting, we consider a one-way configuration of the benchmark problem in which the structural motion is prescribed and drives the fluid prediction. Specifically, the structural displacement history on Γbeam , together with its time derivative, is extracted from the high-fidelity FSI solution and imposed throughout the rollout. The fluid mesh and ALE mapping are updated accordingly at each time step. All ablation results are reported for an interpolative generalization case at 𝑐 2 = −2.0, using the high-fidelity FSI solution as the truth. We report both instantaneous flow-field errors and the error growth during autoregressive rollouts over the entire evaluation window. Figure 8 compares the predicted streamwise velocity 𝑢 𝑓 from GNO-ViT, pure GNO, and GNO-ViT-noBM at autoregressive steps 1 and 15. At step 1, pure GNO yields slightly smaller errors, indicating stronger single-step regression. However, its predictions rapidly lose coherence as the rollout proceeds, whereas GNO-ViT preserves the main flow structures and phase alignment at step 15. In contrast, GNO-ViT-noBM exhibits noticeable near-boundary discrepancies already at step 1 (especially around the beam and inflow), which amplify dramatically by step 15, consistent with the accumulation of interface-induced slip errors when kinematic enforcement is removed. Overall, the qualitative comparisons suggest that ViT is critical for maintaining coherent long-term evolution, while boundary correction is essential for preventing near-wall bias from destabilizing the rollout. Figure 9 shows the temporal evolution of the flow-field correlation coefficient 𝑅 2 for the fluid velocity 𝑢 𝑓 and 𝑝 𝑓 . For the Figure 9(a), the GNO exhibits a slightly higher 𝑅 2 initially but then decays rapidly, whereas GNO-ViT maintains an 𝑅 2 value close to unity throughout the rollout process. When the boundary correction is removed, 𝑅 2 drops rapidly at the beginning to approximately 0.85 and subsequently fluctuates around this level, indicating that temporal modeling alone cannot compensate for persistent near-interface inconsistencies. Figures 10 and 11 provide complementary comparisons of the predicted pressure 𝑝 𝑓 along the flexible-beam boundary ( Γbeam in Figure 1) and the corresponding error distributions. The 

𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 axis corresponds to the numbering of the sampled boundary points on the flexible beam shown in Figure 12: the nodes are indexed counterclockwise along the beam boundary starting from the lower-left end and ending at the upper-left end, with 𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 ranging from 0 to 53. The 

𝐼𝑛𝑑𝑒𝑥 used in the remainder of the paper has the same meaning as defined here. Figure 10 compares the boundary-pressure histories predicted by GNO-ViT, GNO and GNO-ViT-NoBM for 𝑐 2 = −2 about 200 steps. As shown in Figure 10(a), the proposed GNO–ViT closely matches the ground truth across all sampled boundary locations, accurately predicting both the peak amplitudes and the timing of rapid pressure transients. Figure 10(b) reports the ablation results. Although GNO and GNO-ViT-NoBM remain close to the reference at early steps, both exhibit a progressive deterioration as the rollout proceeds, characterized by attenuated pressure peaks and accumulated phase drift. Among them, GNO-ViT-NoBM shows the most pronounced deviation, indicating that removing the boundary-correction constraint leads to a significant loss of near-boundary fidelity and long-horizon stability. Figure 11 shows time-resolved error maps along the beam boundary. For GNO-ViT, the map remains largely blue with thin, periodic bands that follow the shedding frequency, indicating bounded, non-accumulating errors. For GNO, alternating red/blue bands appear and grow with 15 Figure 8: Truth and prediction results of flow field by different methods at step 1 and step 15 for 𝑐 2=-2: (a) truth, (b) GNO-ViT, (c) GNO, (d) GNO-ViT-noBM. 

time. This is indicative of phase drift during autoregressive prediction. In the absence of explicit temporal modeling, local graph convolutions fit each step well but fail to maintain the phase of coherent structures across steps, so the errors oscillate and amplify. For GNO-ViT-noBM, the map is dominated by red color with stripe-like patterns that persist over time. This reflects a systematic bias caused by violating the interface kinematics. The resulting slip at the wall perturbs the near-boundary shear which induces a sustained pressure offset rather than random noise, hence the saturated error levels. This observation is also confirmed by the time evolution of the correlation coefficient 𝑅 2 for the fluid pressure field 𝑝 𝑓 (Figure 9(b)). Besides, the difference between GNO and GNO-ViT-noBM in Figure 11 and Figure 9(b) reveals an noteworthy contrast between global flow accuracy and boundary pressure accuracy. Toward the end of the rollout, the 𝑅 2 of the global fluid pressure field drops to roughly 0.75 for GNO and 0.85 for GNO-ViT-noBM, yet the structural boundary pressure error of GNO is still smaller than GNO-ViT-noBM. This outcome underscores the necessity and efficiency of the boundary correction method: even when the overall flow prediction deteriorates, enforcing the modified boundary velocities preserves higher fidelity in the boundary pressure prediction, confirming that accurate interface prediction depends more on enforcing kinematic fidelity than on global flow correlation. Figure 13 compares the predicted interface velocities obtained with GNO-ViT and GNO-ViT-noBM. Panels (a) and (c) show the streamwise velocity 𝑢 𝑓 , while panels (b) and (d) show the transverse velocity 𝑣 𝑓 . Owing to the ALE-consistent boundary correction, the GNO-ViT prediction matches well with the reference. In contrast, GNO-ViT-noBM yields a noisy and 16 Figure 9: Time evolution of the correlation coefficient 𝑅 2 during rollouts for (a) velocity field 𝑢 𝑓 and (b) the pressure field 𝑝 𝑓 , comparing GNO-ViT, GNO-ViT-noBM, and the GNO. The inset in (a) highlights the early-stage of 𝑢 𝑓 .

Figure 10: Comparison of boundary pressure predictions by GNO-ViT, GNO and GNO-ViT-NoBM for 𝑐 2 = −2: (a) GNO-ViT, (b) GNO and GNO-ViT-NoBM. 

Figure 11: Time-evolution of predicted 𝑝 𝑓 errors by different method for 𝑐 2 = −2: (a) GNO-ViT, (b) GNO, (c) GNO-ViT-noBM. 

Figure 12: Structural boundary node indexing and representative displacements of the flexible beam in the (𝑥, 𝑦 )

plane. The boundary nodes are ordered from the beam root to the tip: indices 0-25 correspond to the lower edge and indices 27-52 correspond to the upper edge. 

17 Figure 13: Prediction and distribution of structural boundary velocity for GNO-ViT and GNO-ViT-NoBM: predicted (a) 𝑢 𝑓 , (b) 𝑣 𝑓 , distribution of original (c) 𝑢 𝑓 , (d) 𝑣 𝑓 .

biased prediction for 𝑢 𝑓 , whereas its prediction for 𝑣 𝑓 remains relatively closer to the reference. The different behaviors of 𝑢 𝑓 and 𝑣 𝑓 can be attributed to both spatial complexity and magnitude disparity. As illustrated by the distributions in Figures 13(c) and (d), 𝑢 𝑓 exhibits stronger local gradients and more pronounced sign variations, making it more difficult to learn. Moveover, the transverse interface motion is substantially larger in magnitude than the streamwise motion along the beam, making 𝑢 𝑓 more susceptible to noise and regression errors. Even after normalization, 

𝑢 𝑓 remains small relative to the main flow velocity scale, which further increases the difficulty of stable learning. Since boundary data directly mediate the FSI coupling, inaccurate interface velocities propagate to near-wall shear, pressure distribution, and load transfer. The boundary correction replaces the fluid-side boundary velocity with the physically consistent structural velocity. This constraint effectively suppresses interface drift during rollouts and guides the surrogate toward stable and physically admissible predictions. Overall, these results demonstrate the role of temporal coherence (enabled by the ViT’s global self-attention) and spatial boundary consistency (enforced by ALE-consistent boundary correction) in the proposed framework. The former helps maintain phase-locked evolution of coherent vortical structures and suppresses error propagation during autoregressive rollouts, while the latter enforces interfacial kinematic compatibility and mitigates slip-induced near-wall pressure bias. 

3.3.2. Role of long-term training 

To examine the role of long-term training strategy, we conduct an ablation in which the fluid and structure models are trained separately with single-step (short-term) supervision and are then directly coupled for FSI prediction, without accumulating rollout losses over multiple future steps. Figure 14 compares the predicted and reference for 𝑥 and 𝑦 displacement history at point A for 𝑐 2 = −2 and 𝑐 2 = 6 obtained without long-term training. The short-term trained model 18 reproduces the periodic response with high accuracy at early time. However, as time advances, the predicted trajectory develops a progressive phase lag relative to the reference solution, indicating cumulative temporal drift. This behavior originates from the one-step supervision paradigm, in which training minimizes only instantaneous losses without accounting for error propagation that occur when predictions are recursively fed back as inputs during long rollouts. As a result, minor local discrepancies amplify over time, leading to progressive desynchronization of the displacement waveform. The degradation is further quantified by the temporal evolution of the flow-field correlation coefficient 𝑅 2, as shown in Figure 15. For both 𝑐 2 = −2 and 𝑐 2 = 6, the short-term trained model shows a clear decrease in 𝑅 2 as the rollout progresses, accompanied by quasi-periodic flucturations. In contrast, the long-term trained model consistently maintains high 𝑅 2 values, indicating improved temporal robustness. This difference highlights the importance of long-term training, which introduces autoregressive consistency constraints by explicitly exposing the model to its own prediction feedback during training. This self-supervised correction enables it to internalize the temporal dependencies and develop a more stable representation of the underlying physical dynamics. The proposed long-term training strategy is conceptually similar to one-shot multi-step predicting in that both aim to mitigate error accumulation across future steps. The key difference lies in how multi-step error is exposed. In the one-shot setting, the model receives the aggregate multi-step error in a single update, whereas long-term training obtains these errors progressively through autoregressive rollouts. Although the optimization logic is comparable, the above difference is crucial for the flow-control applications. Because the FSI field is generated step-by-step, control inputs can be deployed at any desired time step. This flexibility is absent in one-shot generation, making it unsuitable for such control tasks. Overall, while short-term supervision yields accurate one-step predictions, long-term training promotes global temporal coherence and error resilience. The latter ensures that the FSI dynamics remain physically consistent over extended prediction terms, which is essential for high-fidelity FSI simulation and closed-loop control. 19 Figure 14: Prediction and truth for the time histories of normalized structural displacements at monitoring point A in the periodic regime using short-term training only (without long-term fine-tuning): (a) 𝑥 /𝑑 for 𝑐 2 = −2; (b) 𝑦 /𝑑 

for 𝑐 2 = −2; (c) 𝑥 /𝑑 for 𝑐 2 = 6; (d) 𝑦 /𝑑 for 𝑐 2 = 6.

Figure 15: Time evolution of the flow-field correlation coefficient 𝑅 2 of 𝑢 𝑓 between prediction and truth for short-term and long-term training: (a) 𝑐 2 = −2; (b) 𝑐 2 = 6.

20 4. Conclusions 

This study proposed an ALE-consistent GNO-Transformer framework for FSI prediction on deforming unstructured meshes. The framework couples (i) a GNO-ViT surrogate for predicting the fluid state on deforming meshes, (ii) a lightweight LSTM for predicting interfacial structural kinematics, and (iii) an ALE-consistent boundary correction strategy that explicitly enforces interfacial kinematic condition. To improve rollout robustness, we further adopt a two-stage training protocol consisting of single-step pretraining followed by long-term autoregressive fine-tuning, which exposes the model to its own feedback and mitigates cumulative error growth. Comprehensive evaluations using an FSI benchmark demonstrate accurate and stable pre-diction in both periodic and non-periodic (transient) regimes, as well as strong interpola-tion/extrapolation generalization under inlet-profile variations. Quantitatively, the proposed GNO-ViT framework maintains a flow-field correlation coefficient 𝑅 2 close to unity throughout the rollout. Besides, via ablation studies, we find that removing the ALE-consistent boundary correction causes an early drop of 𝑅 2 ≈ 0.85 for both 𝑢 𝑓 and 𝑝 𝑓 , indicating that temporal modeling alone is insufficient to offset persistent interface inconsistencies. Moreover, replacing GNO-ViT with a pure GNO further degrades 𝑅 2 to 0.75 for both 𝑢 𝑓 and 𝑝 𝑓 at the end of the rollout, further highlighting the role of global temporal modeling and interfacial kinematic enforcement in stabilizing long-term predictions. In addition, long-term autoregressive fine-tuning improves rollout stability by increasing the end-of-term 𝑅 2 from 0.95 (single-step only) to 0.99 , which is consistent with the observed suppression of phase drift under recursive prediction. Beyond the global metrics, the ALE-consistent boundary correction also improves near-boundary fidelity: the boundary pressure predictions from GNO-ViT closely match the reference throughout the rollout, whereas removing the boundary correction introduces systematic near-wall bias and amplifies errors. These results clarify the complementary roles of the four key components in the proposed framework: the GNO provides geometry-aware spatial modeling on unstructured domains; the ViT promotes long-range temporal coherence and mitigates phase drift during autoregressive rollouts; the long-term autoregressive training strategy suppresses compounding error accumulation and stabilizes multi-step predictions; and the ALE-consistent boundary correction enforces kinematic fidelity at the moving interface, preventing slip-induced near-wall bias from destabilizing the coupled feedback loop. Limitations remain in that the present study focuses on a canonical 2D benchmark. Future work will extend the framework to 3D FSI configurations, incorporate additional physics constraints during training, and explore tighter integration with high-fidelity ALE solvers for hybrid data-physics coupling toward real-time control applications. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the National Key R&D Program of China (2024YFC3013200). 

AUTHOR DECLARATIONS 

The authors have no conflicts to disclose. 21 DATA AVAILABILITY 

The dataset of this study is available in the Zenodo repository [ 55 ]. Python code is available at https://github.com/hunger-233/ale-gno-vit-fsi .

Appendix A. Additional GNO-ViT FSI prediction results             

> Figure A.1: Comparison of prediction and truth of flow field at time 𝑡 1for 𝑐 2=-2: (a) 𝑢 𝑓 , (b) 𝑣 𝑓 , (c) 𝑝 𝑓 .

22 Figure A.2: Comparison of prediction and truth of flow field at time 𝑡 3 for 𝑐 2=-2: (a) 𝑢 𝑓 , (b) 𝑣 𝑓 , (c) 𝑝 𝑓 .

Figure A.3: Comparison of prediction and truth of flow field at time 𝑡 1 for 𝑐 2=6: (a) 𝑢 𝑓 , (b) 𝑣 𝑓 , (c) 𝑝 𝑓 .

23 Figure A.4: Comparison of prediction and truth of flow field at time 𝑡 2 for 𝑐 2=6: (a) 𝑢 𝑓 , (b) 𝑣 𝑓 , (c) 𝑝 𝑓 .

Figure A.5: Comparison of prediction and truth of flow field at time 𝑡 3 for 𝑐 2=6: (a) 𝑢 𝑓 , (b) 𝑣 𝑓 , (c) 𝑝 𝑓 .

24 References 

[1] Francisco Huera-Huarte. Vortex-induced vibration of flexible cylinders in cross-flow. 

Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics , 57, 2025. [2] Xinlong Wang, Dongsheng Qiao, Linxiao Jin, Jun Yan, Bin Wang, Binbin Li, and Jinping Ou. Numerical investigation of wave run-up and load on heaving cylinder subjected to regular waves. Ocean Engineering , 268:113415, 2023. [3] Jiaqing Kou and Weiwei Zhang. Data-driven modeling for unsteady aerodynamics and aeroelasticity. Progress in Aerospace Sciences , 125:100725, 2021. [4] Yujie Sun, Jiayi Huang, Qingshuang Lu, Xinhai Yue, Xuanming Huang, Wei He, Yun Shi, and Ju Liu. Modeling fibrous tissue in vascular fluid–structure interaction: A morphology-based pipeline and biomechanical significance. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Biomedical Engineering , 41(1):e3892, 2025. [5] Shunxiang Cao and Daniel Zhengyu Huang. Bayesian calibration for large-scale fluid struc-ture interaction problems under embedded/immersed boundary framework. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering , 123(8):1791–1812, 2022. [6] Philip Beran, Bret Stanford, and Christopher Schrock. Uncertainty quantification in aeroelasticity. Annual review of fluid mechanics , 49(1):361–386, 2017. [7] Nirmal J Nair and Andres Goza. Bio-inspired variable-stiffness flaps for hybrid flow control, tuned via reinforcement learning. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 956:R4, 2023. [8] Yangwei Liu, Feitong Wang, Shihang Zhao, and Yumeng Tang. A novel framework for predicting active flow control by combining deep reinforcement learning and masked deep neural network. Physics of Fluids , 36(3), 2024. [9] Yujia Zhao, Haokui Jiang, Jichao Li, and Shunxiang Cao. Comparative study of rein-forcement learning and reduced-order model-based control for mitigating vortex-induced vibration. Physics of Fluids , 37(4), 2025. [10] Haokui Jiang and Shunxiang Cao. Model predictive control of fluid–structure interaction via koopman-based reduced-order model. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 1026:A32, 2026. [11] Dongxu Yin, Yumeng Tang, Feitong Wang, Shihang Zhao, and Yangwei Liu. Co-flow jet control for strong turbulence over an airfoil based on deep reinforcement learning and attention mechanism. Physics of Fluids , 38(1), 2026. [12] Sumant R Morab and Atul Sharma. An overview of computational fluid structure interaction: Methods and applications, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.04068 .[13] Paola Causin, Jean-Frédéric Gerbeau, and Fabio Nobile. Added-mass effect in the design of partitioned algorithms for fluid–structure problems. Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering , 194(42-44):4506–4527, 2005. [14] Shunxiang Cao, Alex Main, and Kevin G Wang. Robin-neumann transmission conditions for fluid-structure coupling: embedded boundary implementation and parameter analysis. 

International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering , 115(5):578–603, 2018. 25 [15] M’hamed Souli and David J Benson. Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian and fluid-structure interaction: numerical simulation . John Wiley & Sons, 2013. [16] Muhammad Idrees Afridi, Mohsen Izadi, Mohammad Eizadi, Hussein A Mohammed, Reza Karimi, Faris Alqurashi, Mohamed H Mohamed, Ahmad Hajjar, Mohamed Bechir Ben Hamida, Ibrahim Mahariq, et al. Fluid–structure interaction in engineering based on its applications: A plenary and up-to-date review. Physics of Fluids , 36(10), 2024. [17] Steven L Brunton, Bernd R Noack, and Petros Koumoutsakos. Machine learning for fluid mechanics. Annual review of fluid mechanics , 52(1):477–508, 2020. [18] Leon Herrmann and Stefan Kollmannsberger. Deep learning in computational mechanics: a review. Computational Mechanics , 74(2):281–331, 2024. [19] Kunihiko Taira, Steven L Brunton, Scott TM Dawson, Clarence W Rowley, Tim Colonius, Beverley J McKeon, Oliver T Schmidt, Stanislav Gordeyev, Vassilios Theofilis, and Lawrence S Ukeiley. Modal analysis of fluid flows: An overview. AIAA journal , 55(12): 4013–4041, 2017. [20] Harsh Sharma, David A Najera-Flores, Michael D Todd, and Boris Kramer. Lagrangian operator inference enhanced with structure-preserving machine learning for nonintrusive model reduction of mechanical systems. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 423:116865, 2024. [21] Aviral Prakash and Yongjie Jessica Zhang. Projection-based reduced order modeling and data-driven artificial viscosity closures for incompressible fluid flows. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 425:116930, 2024. [22] Matthew J Whisenant and Kivanc Ekici. Galerkin-free technique for the reduced-order modeling of fluid-structure interaction via machine learning. In AIAA Scitech 2020 Forum ,page 1637, 2020. [23] Haokui Jiang and Shunxiang Cao. Balanced proper-orthogonal-decomposition-based feedback control of vortex-induced vibration. Physical Review Fluids , 9(7):073901, 2024. [24] Haokui Jiang, Jean-Lou Pfister, Daniel Zhengyu Huang, and Shunxiang Cao. Koopman reduced-order modeling and analysis of flag flapping in the wake of a cylinder. Physical Review E , 111(4):045101, 2025. [25] Yangwei Liu, Shihang Zhao, Feitong Wang, and Yumeng Tang. A novel method for predicting fluid–structure interaction with large deformation based on masked deep neural network. Physics of Fluids , 36(2), 2024. [26] Xiantao Fan and Jian-Xun Wang. Differentiable hybrid neural modeling for fluid-structure interaction. Journal of Computational Physics , 496:112584, 2024. [27] Md Ashiqur Rahman, Robert Joseph George, Mogab Elleithy, Daniel Leibovici, Zongyi Li, Boris Bonev, Colin White, Julius Berner, Raymond A Yeh, Jean Kossaifi, et al. Pretraining codomain attention neural operators for solving multiphysics pdes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:104035–104064, 2024. 26 [28] Shivam Barwey, Pinaki Pal, Saumil Patel, Riccardo Balin, Bethany Lusch, Venkatram Vishwanath, Romit Maulik, and Ramesh Balakrishnan. Mesh-based super-resolution of fluid flows with multiscale graph neural networks. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 443:118072, 2025. [29] Paulo Sousa, Carlos Veiga Rodrigues, and Alexandre Afonso. Enhancing cfd solver with machine learning techniques. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering ,429:117133, 2024. [30] Dmitrii Kochkov, Jamie A Smith, Ayya Alieva, Qing Wang, Michael P Brenner, and Stephan Hoyer. Machine learning–accelerated computational fluid dynamics. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118(21):e2101784118, 2021. [31] Muk Chen Ong and Guang Yin. Synergizing machine learning with fluid–structure interaction research: An overview of trends and challenges. In Ocean , volume 1. Tsinghua Press, 2025. [32] Azzeddine Tiba, Thibault Dairay, Florian De Vuyst, Iraj Mortazavi, and Juan Pedro Berro Ramirez. Machine-learning enhanced predictors for accelerated convergence of partitioned fluid-structure interaction simulations. Computer Physics Communications , 310:109522, 2025. [33] Renkun Han, Yixing Wang, Yang Zhang, and Gang Chen. A novel spatial-temporal prediction method for unsteady wake flows based on hybrid deep neural network. Physics of Fluids , 31(12), 2019. [34] Sibo Cheng, Marc Bocquet, Weiping Ding, Tobias Sebastian Finn, Rui Fu, Jinlong Fu, Yike Guo, Eleda Johnson, Siyi Li, Che Liu, et al. Machine learning for modelling unstructured grid data in computational physics: a review. Information Fusion , page 103255, 2025. [35] Maziar Raissi, Zhicheng Wang, Michael S Triantafyllou, and George Em Karniadakis. Deep learning of vortex-induced vibrations. Journal of fluid mechanics , 861:119–137, 2019. [36] Rui Gao and Rajeev K Jaiman. Predicting fluid-structure interaction with graph neural networks. Physics of Fluids , 36(1), 2024. [37] Xinshuai Zhang, Tingwei Ji, Fangfang Xie, Changdong Zheng, and Yao Zheng. Data-driven nonlinear reduced-order modeling of unsteady fluid–structure interactions. Physics of Fluids , 34(5), 2022. [38] Hesheng Tang, Yangyang Liao, Hu Yang, and Liyu Xie. A transfer learning-physics informed neural network (tl-pinn) for vortex-induced vibration. Ocean Engineering , 266: 113101, 2022. [39] Guang Yin, Marek Jan Janocha, and Muk Chen Ong. Physics-informed neural networks for prediction of a flow-induced vibration cylinder. Journal of Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering , 146(6):061203, 2024. [40] Qijia Zhai, Shiquan Zhang, Pengtao Sun, and Xiaoping Xie. A projection-based time-segmented reduced order model for fluid-structure interactions. Journal of Computational Physics , 520:113481, 2025. 27 [41] Pan Du, Meet Hemant Parikh, Xiantao Fan, Xin-Yang Liu, and Jian-Xun Wang. Conditional neural field latent diffusion model for generating spatiotemporal turbulence. Nature Communications , 15(1):10416, 2024. [42] Anthony Zhou, Zijie Li, Michael Schneier, John R Buchanan Jr, and Amir Barati Farimani. Text2pde: Latent diffusion models for accessible physics simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01153 , 2024. [43] Wang Xiao, Ting Gao, Kai Liu, Jinqiao Duan, and Meng Zhao. Fourier neural operator based fluid–structure interaction for predicting the vesicle dynamics. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , 463:134145, 2024. [44] Rachit Gupta and Rajeev Jaiman. A hybrid partitioned deep learning methodology for moving interface and fluid–structure interaction. Computers & Fluids , 233:105239, 2022. [45] Renkun Han, Yixing Wang, Weiqi Qian, Wenzheng Wang, Miao Zhang, and Gang Chen. Deep neural network based reduced-order model for fluid–structure interaction system. 

Physics of Fluids , 34(7), 2022. [46] Masanobu Horie and Naoto Mitsume. Physics-embedded neural networks: Graph neural pde solvers with mixed boundary conditions. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:23218–23229, 2022. [47] Tobias Pfaff, Meire Fortunato, Alvaro Sanchez-Gonzalez, and Peter Battaglia. Learning mesh-based simulation with graph networks. In International conference on learning representations , 2020. [48] Rui Gao, Indu Kant Deo, and Rajeev K Jaiman. A finite element-inspired hypergraph neural network: Application to fluid dynamics simulations. Journal of Computational Physics ,504:112866, 2024. [49] Anima Anandkumar, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Kaushik Bhattacharya, Nikola Kovachki, Zongyi Li, Burigede Liu, and Andrew Stuart. Neural operator: Graph kernel network for partial differential equations. In ICLR 2020 workshop on integration of deep neural models and differential equations , 2020. [50] Zongyi Li, Nikola Kovachki, Chris Choy, Boyi Li, Jean Kossaifi, Shourya Otta, Moham-mad Amin Nabian, Maximilian Stadler, Christian Hundt, Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, et al. Geometry-informed neural operator for large-scale 3d pdes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:35836–35854, 2023. [51] Stefan Turek and Jaroslav Hron. Proposal for numerical benchmarking of fluid-structure interaction between an elastic object and laminar incompressible flow . Springer, 2006. [52] A. Dosovitskiy and et al. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020. [53] Sepp Hochreiter and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation ,9(8):1735–1780, 1997. 28 [54] Sihun Lee, Sangmin Lee, Kijoo Jang, Haeseong Cho, and Sangjoon Shin. Data-driven nonlinear parametric model order reduction framework using deep hierarchical variational autoencoder. Engineering with Computers , 40(4):2385–2400, 2024. [55] Shihang Zhao. Supplementary videos s1–s2 for: An ALE-consistent graph neural operator-Transformer framework for fluid-structure interaction. Zenodo, 2026. URL https: //doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18458033 .29