Title: Conformal Prediction in Pepinvent

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.05770v1

Published Time: Fri, 08 May 2026 00:38:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
1

# Confidence is the key: how conformal prediction enhances the 

# generative design of permeable peptides 

Laura van Weesep 1,2 ,3 * Sunay Chankeshwara 4, Leonardo De Maria 4, Florian David 5,

Ola Engkvist 1, 6, Gökçe Geylan 1,5*             

> 1: Molecular AI, Discovery Sciences, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Mölndal , Sweden.
> 2: Department of Information Technology, Uppsala University, Sweden
> 3: Institute for Complex Molecular Systems (ICMS), Eindhoven University of Technology, The
> Netherlands.
> 4:Hit Discovery ,Discovery Sciences, Biopharmaceuticals R&D, AstraZeneca, Mölndal , Sweden.
> 5: Department of Life Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology, SE -41296 Gothenburg, Sweden.
> 6: Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology & University
> of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden
> *email: [lauradesire.vanweese p,gokce.geylan ]@astrazeneca.com

# ABSTRACT 

Generative models coupled with reinforcement learning (RL), such as REINVENT and 

PepINVENT, have emerged as a powerful framework for de novo molecular design. During 

the ideation process these generative frameworks utilize various predictive models as part of 

the optimization objectives. However, the utility of the predictive models can be limited by their 

domain of applicability. When RL is us ed to explore the chemical space with predictive models, 

it can suggest molecules that lie outside the predictor’s domain of applicability. As a result, the 

predictions may become less reliable, potentially steering designs into high reward but also 

high uncertainty chemical spaces. This is particularly pronounced for cyclic peptides which 

show therapeutic promise due to their modifiability and large interaction surfaces but are 

understudied compared to small molecules. While passive membrane permeation in cyclic 

peptides has attracted interest, identifying optimal permeable designs remains challenging yet 

crucial for t argeting intracellular sites. We present an RL -guided generative framework that 

designs permeable cyclic peptides using an uncertainty -aware permeability predictor as the 

scoring component. To address predictive uncertainty, especially impacted by novel ch emistry, 

we integrate conformal prediction (CP) as our uncertainty quantification method. CP assesses 

designs based on the calibrated model under a user -defined confidence level. We demonstrate 

that rewarding generated peptides with CP -informed predictions improves both reliability and 

efficiency of peptide optimization process. This also discourages exploration outside the 

predictor’s applicability domain. This approach bridges the gap between predictive uncertainty 

and RL -guided exploration , showing how gen erative modelling and conformal prediction can 

be combined . It a practical framework for uncertainty -aware molecular design that efficiently 

navigates chemical space with quantified confidence .2

# 1. INTRODUCTION 

The therapeutic potential of peptides is gaining attention due to the potential advantages they 

offer over other modalities like small molecules 1,2 . These include their modifiability 3,4 and larger 

interaction surfaces, which can lead to higher affinity and specificity when targeting larger or 

more shallow surfaces 2,5 . Even though peptides are promising in targeting previously 

undruggable targets 4, their biological applicability to intracellular targets is severely limited by 

metabolic stability and cell permeability 6. One approach to improve metabolic stability is 

incorporating natural amino acid analogues and peptide cyclisation 2, which could also improve 

peptide permeability 7. Nevertheless, particularly, larger cyclic peptides, consisting of more than 

10 residues, often pose a significant permeability challenge 8. Despite ongoing computational 

efforts to decipher the patterns that enhance permeability, translating the insights into rule -

based design criteria remains a challenge due to the intricate nature of this modality. 

Machine learning (ML) has emerged as a tool that utilizes algorithms to learn patterns from 

data, with recently also offering advancements on peptide -focused applications 9,10 , expanding 

beyond its traditional focus on small molecules 11,12 . Given the cost of peptide synthesis and 

technical demand of biochemical assays to assess peptide permeability, ML offers a valuable 

approach to accelerate the cell penetrating peptide design by predicting permeability. The 

CycPeptMPDB 8 database, compiled from over 45 publications with over 6000 peptides in total, 

has enabled a more systematic evaluation of predictive models for permeability. A range of 

approaches have been developed to predict permeability 13 , including support vector machines, 

random forests, and more recent graph neural networks like multi_CycGT 14 and multi -assay 

models 15 . A recent study further exam ined the chall enge of predicting p ermeabil ity , looking at 

the generalizability of algorithms be yond the ir applicability domain. Using a conformal 

prediction framework, the authors showed that, although model performance was maintained 

within the applicability domain defined by the training data, reliability deteriorated in more 

distant regions of chemical space and could be partial ly restored through recalibration with a 

subset of data from the target domain 16 . Nevertheless , fundamental questions remain about 

model reliability when predicting novel peptides that differ significantly from training data, a 

critical concern when using these models to guide generative design .

Reinforcement learning (RL) has been adopted in many de novo drug design applications 17 –20 

as it can be utilized for generating molecules with specific desirable properties. RL for de novo 

design typically involves the use of a generative model and various scoring components such 

as calculated properties or predictive models. While the generative model facilitates the 

exploration of the molecular design space, the scoring components play a c ritical role in 

steering the model towards desired outcomes by refining the search space. Feedback based 

on the scores of the generated molecules is then uti lized to iteratively improve the new set of 

generated molecules, enhancing its ability to produce more effective drug candidates. 

REINVENT is one of the RL -based frameworks that allows for straightforward integration of 

scoring components, offering differe nt flavors addressing a range of applications 21 . More 

recently, also PepINVENT has become available which allows RL -based design for peptidic 

molecules 22 . PepINVENT 23 proposes natural and non -natural amino acids to fill in query 

positions o f an input peptide sequence. In each optimization step, the generated amino acids 

are mapped to query positions, and the completed peptide is scored in the feedback loop 

(Figure 1 ). 

Predictive models for peptides are commonly used as a scoring component in generative 

tasks 22,24,25 . A main challenge when using predictive models in the scoring function of RL is 

quantifying how reliable these models can predict on new instances outside the training data. 

The model probabilities are usually seen as an indication of “uncertainty”, it is however not 

evident how reliable this "uncertainty” is, plus the calibration of these uncertainties is often 

missing. Consequently, predictive models used in scoring functions may produce unreliable 3

predictions for generated molecules outside their applicability domain. This can mislead the 

RL agent, waste computational resources or, worse, generate molecules with falsely confident 

predictions. 

When applying a model to predict new data, it is recommended to assess the model’s 

applicability domain 26,27 , defined as the chemical space and response value range in which the 

model makes reliable predictions 28 . When the new molecule is similar to the training data and 

falls within the applicability domain, the model’s predictions are expected to be more reliable. 

In contrast, if the molecule is outside this domain or dissimilar, the model may yield predictions 

that lack sufficient information, resulting in reduced reliability. Conformal prediction is one of 

the methods to approximate this reliability. 

Conformal prediction (CP) is an uncertainty quantification framework that is implemented on 

top of traditional ML algorithms. The framework calibrates predictions producing valid 

confidence estimates specific to individual predictions 29 . Scores reflect how closely the 

predictions resemble those made on the data used to train or calibrate the ML model. The 

fundamental assumption of CP is that test examples are independent and drawn from the 

same distribution as the calibration set; an ass umption frequently made when employing 

QSAR models 30 . Mondrian inductive conformal prediction (ICP) enables class -specific 

uncertainty estimation, providing calibrated confidence scores independently for each class. 

In binary classification, the model can give one of the 4 predictions: i -ii) single predicti on 

classes, such as “Class 0” and “Class 1”, iii) “None” class indicating that the predicted 

compound is outside of the applicability domain, and iv) “Both” class when there is a lack of 

information to distinguish between the two classes. These predictions are decided under the 

Figure 1: Schematic overview of the generative design in the reinforcement learning loop . A 

macrocyclic peptide with multiple amino acids intended for modification, input to the generative 

model. The generative model produces CHUCKLES -based SMILES for the masked amino 

acid positions. Proposed amino acids for these positions are subsequently mapped into the 

full peptide to assemble the generated peptide. This peptide is then scored using the scoring 

function . Based on the assigned score , feedback is provided to the generative model, which 

iteratively proposed new amino acids to optimize for higher scores .4

user -specified significance level. To illustrate, an 80% confidence level corresponds to a 

significance level of 0.2, implying predictions are valid if the error rate is below 20%. Here, an 

error occurs when a prediction does not include the correct label, with "Both" always being 

accurate. To avoid the model exclusively outputting "Both", efficiency serves as a secondary 

metric. Efficiency tracks the fraction of predicting one of the single classes. The significance 

level impacts the trade -off between effi ciency and validity. Furthermore, to improve conformal 

efficiency, usually multiple ICPs are aggregated to construct an aggregated conformal 

predictor (ACP) 31 . Beyond performance guarantees under the exchangeability assumption, 

ICPs can recalibrate predictions of the ML models to a related domain, by adjusting the 

calibration set. This allows for recalibration without the need for retraining the underlying 

mode l, when predicting on datasets distinct from the training data 32 . These qualities make CP 

a promising approach for assessing uncertainty in predictive models. 

This study aims to leverage elements of conformal prediction and reinforcement learning within 

the context of de novo design of cyclic peptidic molecules, focusing particularly on optimizing 

cell permeability. By integrating CP directly into the RL loop, we not only aim to enhance the 

reliability of the sets of molecules generated, but also the efficiency of exploration. Our study 

addresses the crucial aspect of connecting the uncertainty inherent in predictive models with 

the strategic exploration and lear ning behavior dictated by RL, aiming to enhance the effective 

use of predictive models within this context. By doing so, we aim to create a robust framework 

that navigates the vast chemical space with a higher degree of certainty and strategic foresight. 

# 2. RESULTS 

In the following sections, we will explore the effectiveness of CP as a scoring component in 

RL, with a focus on improving passive peptide permeability. Our objective is to identify peptides 

that are predicted to be permeable with high confidence. In this work, the quality of the method 

is measured by monitoring the efficiency of accessing high -reward spaces and validity of the 

generated samples . Efficiency, in this context, refers to the number of learning steps to reach 

either an average fraction of 0.5 confident permeable predictions or a plateau. Validity is 

defined as the fraction of syntactically valid SMILES strings when generated amino acids are 

mapped back to the que ry positions of the input sequence. 

We evaluated the impact of CP within the RL framework across a test set of 150 queries, 

running each query independently. The queries consisted of 6- to 12 -amino acids long cyclic 

peptidic molecules from Bhardwaj et al. 33 , hereafter referred to as the Baker dataset . Up to 4 

amino acids of the test set peptides were randomly masked, tasking the gene rative model to 

generate the missing amino acids. 

Following PepINVENT’s framework, generated peptides were scored for permeability with an 

XGBoost classifier (see Methods 5.2 ). The permeability was assessed using multiple 

evaluation schemes that vary in how predictive confidence is treated 23 . For each RL run, CP -

based P -values of P 1 (the permeable class) and P 0 (the non -permeable class) were tracked 

alongside the scoring scheme of interest. The P -values enabled monitoring confidence in the 

assigned permeable and non -permeable classes. P 1 above and P 0 below the significance level 

of 0.2 indicated a confident, also conformally efficient, prediction of permeable class. 

2.1. Using Uncertainty -unaware Model Predictions 

Classifiers in RL are typically employed by propagating model probability of the desired class 34 .

Therefore, the model probabilities of the “permeable” class, or class 1, from the XGBoost 

classifier was used as our baseline. Since there are no uncertainty estimates or score 

transformations applied on these predicted probabilities, we refer to these a s raw model 

scores. 5

During the RL runs for 150 test molecules, the average RL score, or raw model score, of the 

valid molecules in the batches were calculated. The raw model scores increased from 0.51 to 

0.87 over 350 epochs ( Figure 2A ). This suggests that the generative model learns to propose 

peptides with an increased probability of being classified as permeable. To determine whether 

the rise in predictive probability corresponds to a similar increase in confident permeable 

predictio ns, we also classified the generated peptides with conformal prediction. It is expected 

that as raw model probabilities increase, the P1 score will increase and P0 score will decrease, 

leading to more permeable predictions that are also confident. The results agreed with this 

expectation as the number of conformally efficient predictions for permeable class increased 

with the increased RL score ( Figure 2A ). This was due to P1 increasing from 0.15 to 0.23 and 

P0 decreasing from 0.35 to 0.23, on average ( Supplementary Figure 1A ). However, the number 

of conformally efficient predictions remained much lower against the raw model’s “permeable” 

predictions. This highlighted the gap between high scoring peptides and confident predictions. 

One of the main reasons for confidence is P0 remaining over 0.2 throughout the run, being the 

fundamental bottleneck for our model. The model cannot confidently distinguish permeable 

from non -permeable peptides for the generated molecules. This demonstrates that high raw 

model probabilities do not guarantee reliable predictions, highlighting the need for uncertainty -

aware scoring. 

Figure 2: Learning progress during RL run with the investigated scoring functions for 

permeability objective. RL processes are shown in score versus learning step plots. The 

scoring functions explored were (A) the probability of class 1 based on the raw model 

repres enting the baseline, and (B -F) various scoring functions built to capture the model 

uncertainty from the CP model. The CP -based functions include (B) P 1, (C) 1 -P0, (D) P 1-P0, (E) 

harsh function, and (F) soft function . The plots include RL scores (grey) ref erring to the output 

of the evaluated scoring function and the fraction of conformally efficient molecules predicted 

to be permeable (green). Conformally efficient predictions are the molecules that fulfill P 1>0.2 

and P 0<0.2. Evolutions of each scoring component over 350 steps for the unique valid 

molecules, are shown as both the average score and the span across the generated peptides 

for 149 independent test cases. 6

2.2. Conformal Prediction in the Scoring Function 

Following the limitations of the raw model, we investigated the ability of RL to generate 

permeable peptides with high confidence predictions. We explored different ways of 

incorporating conformal prediction directly in the scoring function. Since CP -based P-values 

are calculated independently, incorporating one of them alone was considered to mimic 

scoring with raw model probabilities. The two scoring objectives considered were maximizing 

P1 and (1 - P0) values from the conformal predictor. The rationale is to increase conformal 

evidence for permeability by either maximizing P1 directly or, equivalently, minimizing evidence 

for non ‑permeability by maximizing (1 − P0). Additionally, we explored three scoring functions 

combing P1 and P0: i) P1 - P0 in which P1 and 1 - P0 could synergistically drive the generation 

towards identifying more permeable molecules, ii) a “harsh” scoring function in which CP was 

assessed in a binary scheme only rewarding conformally efficient predictions with P0 <0.2 and 

P1 >0.2 and iii ) a “soft” scoring function allows for a partial reward when either one of the two 

requirements for conformal efficiency is met. 

The generative runs show increasing RL scores for all scoring functions utilizing CP. However, 

the single P -value scoring functions, P1 and (1 - P0), showed marginal improvement of the 

average RL scores (Figure 2B -D). The limited learnability of the single P -value scoring 

functions indicates that adjusting the certainty of one of the two P -values does not necessarily 

guarantee confident predictions. Although, P1 and (1 - P0) showed a continuous increase in the 

fraction of conformally efficient predictions, th ey do not reach the levels achieved by scoring 

with the raw model probability. On top of this, the confidence in the permeable label is limited 

(Supplementary Figure 1B, C). These results suggest that maximizing confidence in the 

permeable class alone is i nsufficient, we must also minimize likelihood of belonging to the non -

permeable class. Decoupling the conformal P -values and using a single one as the scoring 

objective hinders learning the joint decision produced by Mondrian ICP. 

Combining P0 and P1 addresses the limitations of using individual metrics by requiring high 

confidence in permeab le and low confidence in non -permeable classes. However, a

straightforward combination such as P1 - P0, led to similar results that suggested that stricter 

guidance on steering the generation towards chemical spaces with lower uncertainty may be 

necessary. 

The “harsh” and “soft” functions were proposed to provide a direct integration of conformal 

efficiency where a confident single -label “permeable” class assessment is rewarded. Harsh 

scoring function showed a steep increase followed by a stable score over 3 50 epochs, 

indicating that it is effectively learnable ( Figure 2E ). As for the soft function, the generation 

reaches the target chemical space in the least number of steps, after only 150 epochs ( Figure 

2F ). In this case, we defined the target chemical space with 50% of the valid molecules with 

confidently predicted as permeable. Therefore, we can conclude that the soft scoring function 

results in the fastest convergence as well as the greatest fraction of molecules that were 

confidently predicted as permeable, compared to all the scoring functions explored. It is worth 

highlighting that the batch averages of P0 and P1 do not converge to below and above the 

significance level of 0.2, to satisfy the conformally efficient predictions (Supplementary Figure 

1). However, P1 reached the highest average scores compared to other scoring methods. 

Since both harsh and soft scoring functions provide discreet reward schemes, the maximum 

reward is reached when P1>0.2 and P0<0.2 for a peptide. Even though raw model probabilities 

provide more peptides with confident permeable predictions. Therefore, we conclude that the 

soft scoring function is an effective approach to generate reliable permeable peptides. To 

further improve t he confidence of predictions in practice, one would need to tune the 

significance level. 7

Motivated by the seeming discrepancy between P 0 and P 1 improvements for the raw model 

versus the CP soft scoring function and the improvement in conformally efficient permeable 

predicted molecules further investigation was done. We examined whether the apparent 

advantage of one scoring function over the other depends on how a “hit” is defined. On the 

left, we compare the number of peptides classified as permeable by the raw model probability 

for the RM scoring function and the soft scoring function. By this definition, the raw model 

scoring function appears superior, yielding more hits than the CP soft scoring function. On the 

right, we consider the number of conformally efficient permeable predictions , i.e., predictions 

that are both permeable and within the model’s applicability domain according to conformal 

prediction. Under this criterion, the CP soft scoring function produces more peptides than the 

raw model. This indicates that optimizing for raw model probability inflates apparent hit rates 

without imp roving calibrated, domain -consistent permeability, while the CP soft scoring 

function better targets reliable, well -calibrated hits. 

2.3. Impact of Scoring Functions on Chemical Validity 

Chemical validity is one of the important aspects in evaluating the impact of scoring objectives 

in the generative process. On one hand, receiving no reward over a number of consecutive 

steps for the entire batch can steer the generation to producing invalid molecules. This is 

particularly plausible in sparse reward scenarios. On the other hand, mode collapse can occur 

when the generative model discovers peptides that receive high reward and generate them 

over and over again 34 . In such cases, validity of the unique molecules we obtain can be 

significantly reduced. 149 out of 150 cases, we did not encounter this. However, one of the 

molecules, test molecule 7, led to an error for the harsh scoring function, therefore got omitted 

from all the results. For the rest of the test cases, the number of unique valid molecules over 

350 epochs was calculated. 

The average number of unique valid molecules for the soft scoring function was lowest out of 

all the scoring functions tried (Figure 4A), but the mean number of conformally efficient 

permeable predictions was highest out of all scoring functions tried ( Figure 4B) . This highlight s

that looking at valid molecules only, does not give guarantees for the highest number of 

Figure 4: Th e number of peptides classified as permeable according to the raw model (A) 

probability under the raw model scoring function (red) and the CP soft scoring function (green). 

On the right (B), the number of peptides that are conformally efficient and permeab le under 

the same two scoring regimes. The raw model scoring function produces more raw -probability 

permeable peptides (A), whereas the CP soft scoring function produces more conformally 

efficient permeable peptides (B), highlighting a mismatch between raw probability and 

conformal efficiency. 

Figure 3: The number of valid molecules generated (A) per scoring function and the number of 

peptides predicted to be permeable in a conformally efficient way (B). The red diamond 

corresponds to the mean over 149 cases, with each point corresponding to an individual test 

case. The number of valid scoring functions was compared to the RM p1 scoring function using 

a Wilcoxon test, with * corresponding to p<0.05, ** corresponding to p<0.01 and *** p<0.001. 

Despite the number of valid molecules being significantly differ ent, no significant difference in 

the number of conformally efficient molecules was found. 8

molecules meeting your criteria . On top of this, it was noted that the soft scoring function in the 

worst cases (lowest 10 th percentile), produces more valid molecules than the harsh function 

(2282.8 vs 2172.8), indicating fewer failures , l ikely related to the reward sparsity due to the 

discreet scoring. The reason for this might be that soft scoring function contains a partial 

reward leading to a more gradual steering toward the desired chemical space. The significantly 

lower number of valid molecules being generated whilst generating more conformally efficient 

permeable predicted molecules highlights that the RM p1 score does not efficient ly exploit the 

space. It generates more molecules, but a higher ratio of those molecules does not meet the 

criteria of being conformally efficient permeable predictions. Consequently, the soft function 

was considered to be a robust scoring strategy. It effectively maximizes the difference between 

P1 and P 0 while also maintaining sufficient high validity during peptide generation to not end 

up generating only invalid molecules . Other scoring functions such as the P1, (1 -P0) and P 1-P0

scoring functions generated significantly more valid molecules compared to the RM ( Figure 

2A) , though the RL results and the number of conformally efficient permeable predictions 

uncover that many of these molecules are low scoring molecules ( Figure 1 and Figure 2B ). 

2.4. Effect of Peptide Length on Performance 

As an additional check for robustness of the soft scoring function, we evaluated how the 

generation is impacted on the peptide length. Peptides of lengths 6, 7, and 10 dominate the 

predictor’s training data. 8 This structural imbalance may influence confidence and shapes the 

applicability domain. Therefore, we investigated how each scoring function performs in RL on 

test cases with peptide lengths of 6 to 12. The results indicated that the soft scoring function 

can effectively learn the objective and deliver permeable designs with confidence for lengths 

6, 7, 8 and 10 (Supplementary Figures 2 -4, 6). In these cases, P1 exceeds P0 and reaches this 

separation in fewer epochs than the raw model ( Supplementary Figure s 2 -4, 6 ). Whilst for 

lengths 9, 11 and 12, the performance of the soft scoring function deteriorates which would 

yield lower number of peptides with confident permeable labels (Supplementary Figures 5, 7, 

8). The same behavior wa s observed for the fraction of conformally efficient permeable 

predictions. For length s 6, 7 and 8, 50 epochs half of the valid peptides are predicted to be 

permeable in a conformally efficient way (Supplementary Figures 2 -4) . For peptides of length 

10 it takes roughly 75 steps (Supplementary Figure 6) , whilst for the peptides of length 9, 11 

and 12 the point of 50% of the peptides being predicted to be permeable in a conformally 

efficient way is not reached within 350 epochs (Supplementary Figures 5, 7 & 8) . We also see 

that for all lengths, except for length 12, where not continuous learning was seen by the soft 

scoring function, the soft scoring function always reaches the highest fraction of conformally 

efficient predicted permeable peptides within less e pochs than the raw model scoring function. 

This shows that having uncertainty in the design loop can help identify pitfalls of the predictors 

as scoring components. Also, it can inform the user when to stop relying on the proposed 

peptides in the generat ive design for a particular objective. 

# 3. DISCUSSION 

This research demonstrates that integrating conformal prediction directly into RL -guided 

molecular design enables more reliable and efficient exploration of chemical space . It steers 

the generation toward high scoring regions with calibrated confidence . In this research, we 

investigated how this can be used for de novo design of permeable cyclic peptides. In 

Pep INVENT , the generative model proposes a set of designs that is rewarded based on the 

predictions of the property predictor 22 . In this study, this property is cell permeability. The 

generative model fine -tunes its proposed molecules iteratively based on this reward feedback. 9

However, these models navigate vast chemical spaces and can generate molecules that are 

significantly different from the training data of the predictive model over learning steps. In such 

cases, the predictions reduce to random outputs as the molecules fall outside of their 

applicability domain. This in turn makes the generative process unreliable with objectives not 

fulfilled effectively. If we consider employing multiple predictive models in RL loop, the additive 

uncertainty could dramatically reduce the quality of and the trust towards the proposed 

molecules. 

We hypothesized that integrating conformal prediction would steer RL toward regions 

of chemical space with higher -confidence permeability. Thus, we conducted virtual 

experiments to test whether scoring through uncertainty quantification in RL yields more 

permeable peptides than using raw model probabilities alone. Raw model probabilities 

represented our baseline as the uncertainty -unaware method and the current practice in 

generative design. Although raw model probabilities were readily learned by the RL policy, the 

resulting predictions were, on average, unreliable at the 80% confidence level. This indicate d

that the significant portion of the high -scoring permeable designs would be questionable 

according to this method .

Scoring in the RL loop under uncertainty was assessed through various scenarios. Conformal 

prediction, using Mondrian ICP, utilizes two independent P -values to yield a decision . In the 

scenarios explored, we observed that using a single P -value as the scoring component, 

maximizing P1 or minimizing P0 was effectively learned without sacrificing validity of the 

generated peptides. However, learning either objective alone did not increase the number of 

peptides confidently predicted to be permeable. Dismantli ng the duality of CP showed no 

guarantee of reciprocity: maximizing P1 does not ensure low P0, and minimizing P0 does not 

ensure high P1. When conformal efficiency itself was used as the scoring scheme, both P -

values are utilized. soft scoring function formulated this through a discreet reward scheme with 

a partial reward when one of the P -values reached its objective. This guide d RL to explore 

chemical space where the predictive model could make reliable distinctions between 

permeability classes at 80% confidence. Also, the soft scoring function with partial reward 

provide d sufficient gradient for learning while generating more unique confor mally efficient 

permeable predicted peptid es compared to its binary counterpart, the ha rsh scoring functions. 

This approach ke pt peptide generation within the predictor’s applicability domain, avoiding the 

common pitfall where RL optimiz ing into unreliable chemical space. Results highligh ted not 

only a higher proportion of permeable molecules but also a faster convergence to the high 

reward space . Notably, even after the harsh and soft rewards reach a steadier slope and slowly 

plateau, still unique conformally efficient permeable predicted peptides are generated, 

indicating that the model is not constrained from further exploring or exploiting the chemical 

space. 

The peptides evaluated here represent a small subset of the possible design space, therefore 

the optimal scoring function may differ for other predictive tasks. We also observed that the 

choice of query peptide influences learning performance. In particula r, conformal efficiency 

can be harder to achieve when unmasked amino acids impose overly restrictive constraints or 

when too few positions are masked to shift the peptide’s properties into the desired region. We 

also observed length -dependent performance variations. Optimization was more effective for 

peptide with lengths well -represented in training data (6, 7, and 10 amino acids) . Conformal 

metrics reflected this by indicating these lengths were within the predictor’s applicability 

domain, consistent with better model performance reported previously 13 . Thus, these peptides 

were effectively optimized with conformal scores. Future work could focus on investigating 

other nonconformity scores such as Tanimoto similarity that focuses on the input, instead of 

raw model probabilities thus decoupling underlying model probabilities from uncertainty .10 

Experimenting with other recalibration methods such as Platt -scaling or Venn -Abers 35 , would 

be another interesting avenue to pursue. Also, integrating multiple calibrated predictors in the 

scoring function and investigating their cumulative impact on RL -guided generative process 

can yield new bottlenecks, especially when the applicability domains of predictors are 

significantly different from each other. 

# 4. CONCLUSION 

In conclusion, our approach addresses the crucial aspect of connecting the uncertainty 

inherent in predictive models with the strategic exploration and learning behavior dictated by 

RL. For the first time, w e present an uncertainty -aware generative framework by integrating 

conformal prediction with reinforcement learning ‑guided generative design . We demonstrate 

that factoring user -demanded confidence directly in scoring navigates chemical space more 

efficiently to identify a greater number of peptide designs confidently predicted to be confident 

permeable. This confidence governs conformal efficiency and can be tuned to apply 

optimization pressure within the predictor’s applicability domain. 

Applied to cyclic peptide permeability, CP ‑based peptide scoring produced more suitable 

candidates and sustained 80% confidence for single ‑label permeable predictions. Among the 

strategies tested, the soft scoring function offered a smoother reward landscape that improved 

convergence speed to high reward spaces and maintained exploration within trustworthy 

regions of chemical space. These results underscore the broader potential of the synergistic 

effect between CP, RL, and generative models to enhance reliability and efficiency across 

molecular design tasks bey ond peptide permeability. 11 

# 5. METHODS 

This methods section describes the RL framework for peptide design, the predictive model 

with CP for permeability prediction, and various strategies used to incorporate this predictor 

into the RL loop as a scoring component. 

5.1. Reinforcement Learning Loop 

Figure 5: Overview of an example of how RL can be applied to drug design 

For this research , we employed the PepINVENT framework . This model is a pretrained 

transformer trained on semi -synthetic data, with building blocks including the natural and a 

library of 10,000 non -natural amino acids 23 . To train the network, peptides were written in the 

following format: aa1|aa2|aa3|aa4|aa5 , where each amino acid , aa, separated by “|” is 

written in the CHUCKLES notation 36 . CHUCKLES provides a chemical representation for 

peptide s beyond the natural amino acids by using the simplified molecular input line system 

(SMILES) notation 37 . CHUCKLES writes amino acids in the peptide sequence in the 

standardized format of N -to -C and therefore allows them to be arranged sequentially from N -

terminus (amino group) to C -terminus (carboxyl group) in the peptide chain 38 . The transformer 

model was trained on a masking task, in which random amino acids are masked , and the task 

was to propose amino acids to fill in the se masked positions . This approach enables the model 

to generate molecules with in the context of the entire peptide, including the knowledge of 

cyclisation, disulfides, as well as general amino acid characteristics. 

A simplified overview of the RL framework can be seen in  Figure 5. The RL loop makes use of 

two generative models, the prior and the agent. The generative models estimate the likelihood 

of producing specific tokens  𝑡  in a sequential matter (Equation 1) 21 . In th e RL loop, g enerated 

molecules are scored, and feedback is given to narrow down the generative space to a desired 

region. During training, the scores are calculated for each learning step , and the likelihood 

score given by the prior (unbiased generative model), the agent (biased generative model) ,

and the augmented likelihood are calculated by Equation 2. Based on these , a loss is 

calculated by equation 3, which feeds back information to the agent to generate different 

molecules 39 .

The negative log likelihood (NLL) for the prior and the agent is calculated in the following way: 

NLL (T|S) = − log 𝐏 (T|S) = − ∑ 𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃 (𝑡 𝑖 |𝑡 𝑖 −1, 𝑡 𝑖 −2, … , 𝑡 1, 𝑆 )𝑙  

> 𝑖 =121

, (Equation 1) 12 

With the NLL of the sequence of characters T, given input sequence S, defined as the sum of 

the negative logarithmic probabilities (  𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑃 ) over each character  𝑡 𝑖  given the preceding 

characters  𝑡 𝑖 −1, 𝑡 𝑖 −2, … , 𝑡 1 and input sequence S. 

The augmented likelihood for each sequence is calculated by: 

𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑃 𝑎𝑢𝑔 (𝑇 ) = log 𝑃 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 (𝑇 ) + 𝜎𝑆 (𝑇 ), (Equation 2) 

where  𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑃 𝑎𝑢𝑔 (𝑇 ) is the augmented log likelihood providing a balance between exploration 

and exploitation.  𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑃 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟 (𝑇 ) is the likelihood calculated for a SMILES sequence based on the 

prior, serving as a metric to ensure the validity of the SMILES . 𝑆  is the score given by the 

scoring function and  𝜎  is the weight given to the scoring function . In our case, we used a weight 

of 50 .

The loss is calculated using the following formula: 

ℒ(𝑇 ) = (log 𝑃 𝑎𝑢𝑔 (𝑇 ) − 𝑙𝑜𝑔 𝑃 𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑛𝑡 (𝑇 ))2 21 . (Equation 3) 

Based on the loss, the parameters of the generative model are adjusted to converge to wards 

a space t hat minimize s the loss. 

5.2. Predictive model for Permeability 

Dataset description 

For training the permeability classifier , the Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeability Assay 

(PAMPA) 40 datas et from CycPeptMPDB was used 8. This contains data from t he PAMPA 

assays, which are used to quantitatively predict passive diffusion across phospholipid 

membranes. In total , this dataset contains experimental results from 47 different sources for 

cyclic peptides and peptidic macrocycles, made up of 312 different types of monomers. 

6941 non -conjugated cyclic peptide entries with PAMPA assay results were downloaded and 

standardized with RDKit v. 2022.03.2.22 41 . After canonicalization with chirality , the value 

of  𝐿𝑜𝑔 𝑃 𝑒𝑥𝑝  higher than or equal to -6.00 , was used to differentiate between high and low 

permeability based on previous research 8. The data processing was finalized after eliminating 

the duplicates and the peptides with conflicting labels due to measurement variations from 

different labs. The data processing yields 6876 data points, 2228 non -permeable peptides, 

and 4648 permeable peptides. with cycle size s ranging between 12 to 46 atoms. 

XGBoost Model 

Similar to previous work 22 , a XGBoost v2.0.3 42 classifier to predict permeability was built. In 

this scenario, 10% of the data was allocated to a test set and 90% to the training set . Based 

on prior work establishing extended connectivity fingerprints (ECFP) as molecular descriptors 

giving a robust performance of peptide -related predict ors 24,43,44 . ECFP with radius of 2, 2048 

bits , useCounts =Tru e, useFeatures=False , useChirality =True were used to encode the 

cyclic peptidic molecules 45 . Hyperparameters selected for the model based on 10 -fold cross -

validation using Bayesian search are displayed in  Table 1. Model training and early stopping 

were conducted based on F1 -score. The raw model achieved a balanced accuracy of 78% 

and a sensitivity of 90%. 13 

Table 1: Parameters used to train the XGBoost model for permeability classification 

Hyperparameter  Value 

Colsample by level  0.3 0

Colsample by tree  0. 35 

Learning rate  0. 31 

Max depth  30 

N estimators  295 

Subsample  1

Conformal prediction 

For this research we used an Inductive Mondrian Conformal Prediction (ICP) 30 . The, CP 

provides two p -values: P0 (confidence the molecule is non -permeable) and P1 (confidence the 

molecule is permeable). A molecule is conformally efficient when one p -value is high (>0.2) 

and the other is low (<0.2). A 90 -10% split for the training of the ICP and test sets was used to 

apply training data was further split into proper t raining and calibration sets using the default 

Bootstrap Sampler of the nonconformist package. The proper training set was used to train the 

model, whilst the calibration set is used for calibrating predictions. For this research, we made 

use of an aggregated conformal predictor (ACP) with 10 ICP models and using mean 

aggregation 31 . A CP -based model was obtained with a validity of 82% for class 0, the non -

permeable class, and 85% for class 1, the permeable class. The conformal metrics are defined 

for binary classification as: 

𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡 𝑦 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 =0 = Correct single label 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 =0 + Class "Both" predictions class =0       

> Number of samples with true label 0

(Equation 4) 

𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑𝑖𝑡 𝑦 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 =1 = Correct single label 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 =1 + Class "Both" predictions class =1       

> Number of samples with true label 1

(Equation 5)

𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐 𝑦 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 =0 = Single label predictions 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 =0       

> Number of samples with true label 0

(Equation 6) 

𝐸𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑐 𝑦 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 =1 = Single label predictions 𝑐𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑠 =1       

> Number of samples with true label 1

(Equation 7) 

where classes 0 and 1 describe non -permeable and permeable, respectively . Each subscript 

denoted the true labels of the test set instances. 

Non -conformity score 

We used a non -conformity score based on the model probabilities given by the XGBoost 

model . Figure 7 illustrates how classes are assigned based on a threshold and the distribution 

of predicted probabilities with in the calibration set . The non -conformity score is calculated 

using the following formula: 

𝛼 = 0.5 − 𝑃 ̂ (𝑦 𝑖 |𝑥 )−𝑚𝑎𝑥 y!=yi 𝑃 ̂ (𝑦 |𝑥 ) 

> 2

(Equation 8)14 

with non -conformity score  𝛼  , 𝑃 ̂ (𝑦 𝑖 |𝑥 ) the probability score for the correct class and 

𝑚𝑎𝑥 y!=yi 𝑃 ̂ (𝑦 |𝑥 ) the maximum probability of the wrong class(es). A low non -conformity score 

indicates that the correct class was predicted with high probability, and a high non -conformity 

score indicates that the incorrect class was predicted with high probability. 

Figure 6: Illustration of the CP -based class assignment at a confidence level of 0.8 .

5.3. Scoring Functions 

Six scoring strategies were explored in this study for integrating the uncertainty of the 

permeability predictor to the RL loop. The scoring functions that were experimented with 

include :

I.  RM: Probability Class 1: This scoring function computes the probability of belonging to 

the permeable class using the predict_proba function of the raw model (RM), 

XGBoost. 

II.  CP: P1 value: This scoring function calculates the P1 value, representing the p -value of 

the permeable class of the conformal predictor (CP). Maximizing the P1 value was 

hypothesized to maximize the confidence that the peptide belongs to the permeable 

class. 

III.  CP: 1 -P0 value: This scoring function calculates the P0 value, representing the p -value 

of the non -permeable class according to the conformal predictor. Maximizing 1 -P0, and 

consequently minimizing the P0 value, was hypothesized to enhance the confidence of 

not being non -permeable for a cyclic peptide -like molecule. 

IV.  CP: P1-P0 value: T his scoring function aims to maximize the difference between P1 and 

P0 values. Hence, it increases the confidence of belonging to the permeable class while 

minimizing the confidence of belonging to the non -permeable class. To map the values 

from [ -1, 1] to [0, 1] range, the following function was used: 

reinvent 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒  (𝑃 0, 𝑃 1) = (𝑃 1−𝑃 0)+1

> 2

V.  CP: Harsh function: T his scoring function is aimed at satisfying P 1>0.2 and P0<0.2. 

When both cases are satisfied, the score is assigned a value of 1, otherwise it is given 

the value of 0. The scoring function aims to optimize the conformal efficiency of the 

permeable predictions. 

ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑠 ℎ 𝑓𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑃 0, 𝑃 1) = {1, 𝑃 0 ≤ 0.2 ∧ 𝑃 1 ≥ 0.2

0, 𝑃 0 > 0.2 ∨ 𝑃 1 < 0.2

VI.  CP: Soft function: T his scoring function aims to satisfy P1> 0.2 and P0<0.2, similarly to 

the harsh function. However, a step function with three steps is introduced to penalize 

the two conditions in a more gradual manner compared to the harsh function. When 15 

both requirements are met, the scoring function assigns a score of 1. If only one 

condition is fulfilled, a partial score of 0.5 is given; otherwise, the scoring function yields 

0. 

𝑠𝑜𝑓𝑡 𝑓𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 (𝑃 0, 𝑃 1) = {

1, 𝑃 0 ≤ 0.2 ∧ 𝑃 1 ≥ 0.2

0.5, 𝑃 0 ≤ 0.2 ∨ 𝑃 1 ≥ 0.2

0, 𝑃 0 > 0.2 ∧ 𝑃 1 < 0.2

No additional transformations were applied to any of the scoring functions, and the RL runs 

were conducted for 350 epochs with a batch size of 32. To focus on the effect of the scoring 

function and to eliminate other potential influences, no diversity filt er was applied. In addition 

to the scoring function tested, we also calculated metrics of P0 and P1 from CP during the RL 

runs, as described above. 

5.4. Test data 

The query for testing the different scoring functions was selected from an external test set, 

hereby referred to as the Baker dataset 33 . The dataset contains peptides ranging from 6 to 12 

amino acids in length, with expanded natural amino acids content. From the Baker dataset, 

150 random cyclic peptides with lengths 6, 7 and 10 were selected, reflecting the monomer 

length distribution tha t the XGBoost model was trained on. One up to 4 amino acids were 

randomly masked at random positions for each sequence. 16 

# 6. REFERENCES 

(1) Choi, J. -S.; Joo, S. H. Recent Trends in Cyclic Peptides as Therapeutic Agents and Biochemical 

Tools. Biomol. Ther. 2019 , 28 . https://doi.org/10.4062/biomolther.2019.082. 

(2) Wang, L.; Wang, N.; Zhang, W.; Cheng, X.; Yan, Z.; Shao, G.; Wang, X.; Wang, R.; Fu, C. 

Therapeutic Peptides: Current Applications and Future Directions. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther. 

2022 , 7 (1), 48. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392 -022 -00904 -4. 

(3) Lee, M. F.; Poh, C. L. Strategies to Improve the Physicochemical Properties of Peptide -Based 

Drugs. Pharm. Res. 2023 , 40 (3), 617 –632. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095 -023 -03486 -0. 

(4) Sharma, K.; Sharma, K. K.; Sharma, A.; Jain, R. Peptide -Based Drug Discovery: Current Status 

and Recent Advances. Drug Discov. Today 2023 , 28 (2), 103464. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2022.103464. 

(5) La Manna, S.; Di Natale, C.; Florio, D.; Marasco, D. Peptides as Therapeutic Agents for 

Inflammatory -Related Diseases. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018 , 19 (9), 2714. 

(6) Fosgerau, K.; Hoffmann, T. Peptide Therapeutics: Current Status and Future Directions. Drug 

Discov. Today 2015 , 20 (1), 122 –128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.drudis.2014.10.003. 

(7) Dougherty, P. G.; Wen, J.; Pan, X.; Koley, A.; Ren, J. -G.; Sahni, A.; Basu, R.; Salim, H.; Appiah 

Kubi, G.; Qian, Z.; Pei, D. Enhancing the Cell Permeability of Stapled Peptides with a Cyclic Cell -

Penetrating Peptide. J. Med. Chem. 2019 , 62 (22), 10098 –10107. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.9b00456. 

(8) Li, J.; Yanagisawa, K.; Sugita, M.; Fujie, T.; Ohue, M.; Akiyama, Y. CycPeptMPDB: A

Comprehensive Database of Membrane Permeability of Cyclic Peptides. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 

2023 , 63 (7), 2240 –2250. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.2c01573. 

(9) Fernández -Díaz, R.; Cossio -Pérez, R.; Agoni, C.; Hoang, T. L.; Lopez, V.; Shields, D. C. 

AutoPeptideML: A Study on How to Build More Trustworthy Peptide Bioactivity Predictors. 

Bioinformatics 2024 , btae555. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae555. 

(10) He, Q.; Li, X.; Zhong, J.; Yang, G.; Han, J.; Shuai, J. Dear -PSM: A Deep Learning -Based Peptide 

Search Engine Enables Full Database Search for Proteomics. Smart Med. 2024 , n/a (n/a), 

e20240014. https://doi.org/10.1002/SMMD.20240014. 

(11) Cieślak, M.; Danel, T.; Krzysztyńska -Kuleta, O.; Kalinowska -Tłuścik, J. Machine Learning 

Accelerates Pharmacophore -Based Virtual Screening of MAO Inhibitors. Sci. Rep. 2024 , 14 (1), 

8228. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -024 -58122 -7. 

(12) Gentile, F.; Yaacoub, J. C.; Gleave, J.; Fernandez, M.; Ton, A. -T.; Ban, F.; Stern, A.; Cherkasov, 

A. Artificial Intelligence –Enabled Virtual Screening of Ultra -Large Chemical Libraries with Deep 

Docking. Nat. Protoc. 2022 , 17 (3), 672 –697. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41596 -021 -00659 -2. 

(13) Liu, W.; Li, J.; Verma, C. S.; Lee, H. K. Systematic Benchmarking of 13 AI Methods for Predicting 

Cyclic Peptide Membrane Permeability. J. Cheminformatics 2025 , 17 (1), 129. 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321 -025 -01083 -4. 

(14) Cao, L.; Xu, Z.; Shang, T.; Zhang, C.; Wu, X.; Wu, Y.; Zhai, S.; Zhan, Z.; Duan, H. Multi_CycGT: 

A Deep Learning -Based Multimodal Model for Predicting the Membrane Permeability of Cyclic 

Peptides. J. Med. Chem. 2024 , 67 (3), 1888 –1899. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.3c01611. 

(15) Tan, X.; Liu, Q.; Fang, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Chen, F.; Zeng, W.; Ouyang, D.; Dong, J. Predicting Peptide 

Permeability Across Diverse Barriers: A Systematic Investigation. Mol. Pharm. 2024 , 21 (8), 4116 –

4127. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.4c00478. 

(16) Geylan, G.; De Maria, L.; Engkvist, O.; David, F.; Norinder, U. A Methodology to Correctly Assess 

the Applicability Domain of Cell Membrane Permeability Predictors for Cyclic Peptides. Digit. 

Discov. 2024 , 3 (9), 1761 –1775. 

(17) Olivecrona, M.; Blaschke, T.; Engkvist, O.; Chen, H. Molecular De -Novo Design through Deep 

Reinforcement Learning. J. Cheminformatics 2017 , 9, 1 –14. 

(18) Popova, M.; Isayev, O.; Tropsha, A. Deep Reinforcement Learning for de Novo Drug Design. Sci. 

Adv. 4 (7), eaap7885. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aap7885. 

(19) Atance, S. R.; Diez, J. V.; Engkvist, O.; Olsson, S.; Mercado, R. De Novo Drug Design Using 

Reinforcement Learning with Graph -Based Deep Generative Models. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2022 ,

62 (20), 4863 –4872. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.2c00838. 

(20) Guo, J.; Schwaller, P. Augmented Memory: Sample -Efficient Generative Molecular Design with 

Reinforcement Learning. JACS Au 2024 , 4, 2160 –2172. 17 

(21) Loeffler, H. H.; He, J.; Tibo, A.; Janet, J. P.; Voronov, A.; Mervin, L. H.; Engkvist, O. Reinvent 4: 

Modern AI –Driven Generative Molecule Design. J. Cheminformatics 2024 , 16 (1), 20. 

https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321 -024 -00812 -5. 

(22) Geylan, G.; Janet, J. P.; Tibo, A.; He, J.; Patronov, A.; Kabeshov, M.; David, F.; Czechtizky, W.; 

Engkvist, O.; Maria, L. D. PepINVENT: Generative Peptide Design beyond the Natural Amino 

Acids, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14040. 

(23) Amarasinghe, K. N.; De Maria, L.; Tyrchan, C.; Eriksson, L. A.; Sadowski, J.; Petrović, D. Virtual 

Screening Expands the Non -Natural Amino Acid Palette for Peptide Optimization. J. Chem. Inf. 

Model. 2022 , 62 (12), 2999 —3007. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.2c00193. 

(24) Schissel, C. K.; Mohapatra, S.; Wolfe, J. M.; Fadzen, C. M.; Bellovoda, K.; Wu, C. -L.; Wood, J. A.; 

Malmberg, A. B.; Loas, A.; Gómez -Bombarelli, R.; Pentelute, B. L. Deep Learning to Design 

Nuclear -Targeting Abiotic Miniproteins. Nat. Chem. 2021 , 13 (10), 992 –1000. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41557 -021 -00766 -3. 

(25) Wang, Q.; Hu, X.; Wei, Z.; Lu, H.; Liu, H. Reinforcement Learning -Driven Exploration of Peptide 

Space: Accelerating Generation of Drug -like Peptides. Brief. Bioinform. 2024 , 25 (5), bbae444. 

https://doi.org/10.1093/bib/bbae444. 

(26) Hanser, T.; Barber, C.; Guesné, S.; Marchaland, J. F.; Werner, S. Applicability Domain: Towards 

a More Formal Framework to Express the Applicability of a Model and the Confidence in Individual 

Predictions. Adv. Comput. Toxicol. Methodol. Appl. Regul. Sci. 2019 , 215 –232. 

(27) Mathea, M.; Klingspohn, W.; Baumann, K. Chemoinformatic Classification Methods and Their 

Applicability Domain. Mol. Inform. 2016 , 35 (5), 160 –180. 

(28) Organisation for Economic Co -operation and Development. Guidance Document on the Validation 

of (Quantitative) Structure -Activity Relationship [(Q) SAR] Models ; Organisation for Economic Co -

operation and Development, 2014. 

(29) Alvarsson, J.; Arvidsson McShane, S.; Norinder, U.; Spjuth, O. Predicting With Confidence: Using 

Conformal Prediction in Drug Discovery. J. Pharm. Sci. 2021 , 110 (1), 42 –49. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xphs.2020.09.055. 

(30) Norinder, U.; Carlsson, L.; Boyer, S.; Eklund, M. Introducing Conformal Prediction in Predictive 

Modeling. A Transparent and Flexible Alternative to Applicability Domain Determination. J. Chem. 

Inf. Model. 2014 , 54 (6), 1596 –1603. https://doi.org/10.1021/ci5001168. 

(31) Carlsson, L.; Eklund, M.; Norinder, U. Aggregated Conformal Prediction; Springer, 2014; pp 231 –

240. 

(32) Morger, A.; Garcia de Lomana, M.; Norinder, U.; Svensson, F.; Kirchmair, J.; Mathea, M.; 

Volkamer, A. Studying and Mitigating the Effects of Data Drifts on ML Model Performance at the 

Example of Chemical Toxicity Data. Sci. Rep. 2022 , 12 (1), 7244. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -

022 -09309 -3. 

(33) Bhardwaj, G.; O’Connor, J.; Rettie, S.; Huang, Y. -H.; Ramelot, T. A.; Mulligan, V. K.; Alpkilic, G. 

G.; Palmer, J.; Bera, A. K.; Bick, M. J.; Di Piazza, M.; Li, X.; Hosseinzadeh, P.; Craven, T. W.; 

Tejero, R.; Lauko, A.; Choi, R.; Glynn, C.; Dong, L.; Gri ffin, R.; van Voorhis, W. C.; Rodriguez, J.; 

Stewart, L.; Montelione, G. T.; Craik, D.; Baker, D. Accurate de Novo Design of Membrane -

Traversing Macrocycles. Cell 2022 , 185 (19), 3520 -3532.e26. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2022.07.019. 

(34) Blaschke, T.; Arús -Pous, J.; Chen, H.; Margreitter, C.; Tyrchan, C.; Engkvist, O.; Papadopoulos, 

K.; Patronov, A. REINVENT 2.0: An AI Tool for De Novo Drug Design. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2020 ,

60 (12), 5918 –5922. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.0c00915. 

(35) Vovk, V.; Petej, I. Venn -Abers Predictors, 2014. https://arxiv.org/abs/1211.0025. 

(36) Siani, M. A.; Weininger, D.; Blaney, J. M. CHUCKLES: A Method for Representing and Searching 

Peptide and Peptoid Sequences on Both Monomer and Atomic Levels. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 

1994 , 34 (3), 588 –593. https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00019a017. 

(37) Weininger, D. SMILES, a Chemical Language and Information System. 1. Introduction to 

Methodology and Encoding Rules. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 1988 , 28 (1), 31 –36. 

https://doi.org/10.1021/ci00057a005. 

(38) Minkiewicz, P.; Iwaniak, A.; Darewicz, M. Annotation of Peptide Structures Using SMILES and 

Other Chemical Codes –Practical Solutions. Molecules 2017 , 22 (12). 

https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules22122075. 

(39) Patronov, A.; Margreitter, C.; Guo, J.; Loeffler, H. H.; Blaschke, T. REINVENT 3.2, 2022. 

(40) Kansy, M.; Senner, F.; Gubernator, K. Physicochemical High Throughput Screening: Parallel 

Artificial Membrane Permeation Assay in the Description of Passive Absorption Processes. J. 

Med. Chem. 1998 , 41 (7), 1007 –1010. https://doi.org/10.1021/jm970530e. 

(41) Landrum, G. RDKit: Cheminformatics and Machine Learning Software. RDKIT ORG 2013 , 232 .18 

(42) Chen, T.; Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. In Proceedings of the 22nd 

ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ; KDD ’16; 

Association for Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2016; pp 785 –794. 

https://doi.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785. 

(43) Adamczyk, J.; Ludynia, P.; Czech, W. Molecular Fingerprints Are Strong Models for Peptide 

Function Prediction, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17901. 

(44) Mohapatra, S.; Hartrampf, N.; Poskus, M.; Loas, A.; Gómez -Bombarelli, R.; Pentelute, B. L. Deep 

Learning for Prediction and Optimization of Fast -Flow Peptide Synthesis. ACS Cent. Sci. 2020 , 6

(12), 2277 –2286. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscentsci.0c00979. 

(45) Rogers, D.; Hahn, M. Extended -Connectivity Fingerprints. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2010 , 50 (5), 742 –

754. 19 

# Supplementary Figures 

Figure SI 1: Tracked scores of the experiments using different scoring functions. Average RL 

Score (grey), CP’s P 0 (blue) and P 1 (purple) values during the RL run. The plots include RL 

scores (grey) referring to score of the evaluated scoring function, CP’s P0 (blue) and P 1 (purple) 

values. Evolution of each scoring component over 350 steps, shown as both the average score 

and the span across the peptides generated for 150 independent test cases, each performed 

with a batch size of 32. The scoring function used was (A) the probability of class 1 based on 

the raw model, (B) P 1-value from the CP -based calibrated model, (C) 1 - P0 -value from the CP -

based calibrated model, (D) P 1- P0 value from the CP -based calibrated model, (E) Harsh 

function based on conformal efficiency, and (F) the soft function. Note that for the P 1-value 

scoring function (B), the P 1-value that was tracked overlaps with the RL score since they are 

the same metric, therefore not visible. Evolutions of each scoring component over 350 steps 

for the unique valid molecules, are shown as both the average score and the span across the 

generated peptides for 149 independent test cases. 20 

Figure SI 2: Tracked scores of the experiments using different scoring functions for peptides 

with length 6. Average RL Score (grey), CP’s P 0 value (blue), P 1 value (purple) and the fraction 

of conformally efficient molecules predicted to be permeable (green) during the RL run. The 

plots include RL scores (grey) referring to score of the evaluated scoring function, CP’s P 0

(blue) and P 1 (purple) values. Evolution of each scoring component over 350 steps, shown as 

both the average score and the span across the peptides generated for 150 independent test 

cases, each performed with a batch size of 32. The scoring function used was (A) the 

probability of class 1 based on the raw model, (B) P 1-value from the CP -based calibrated 

model, (C) 1 - P0 -value from the CP -based calibrated model, (D) P 1- P0 value from the CP -

based calibrated model, (E) Harsh function based on conformal efficiency, and (F) the soft 

function. Note that for the P 1-value scoring function (B), the P 1-value tracked overlaps with the 

RL score which is why it is not visible. The same is true for the conformally efficient line in 

green and the harsh scoring function (E). Evolutions of each scoring component over 350 steps 

for the unique valid molecules, a re shown as both the average score and the span across the 

generated peptides for 149 independent test cases. 21 

Figure SI 3: Tracked scores of the experiments using different scoring functions for peptides 

with length 7. Average RL Score (grey), CP’s P 0 value (blue), P 1 value (purple) and the fraction 

of conformally efficient molecules predicted to be permeable (green) during the RL run. The 

plots include RL scores (grey) referring to score of the evaluated scoring function, CP’s P 0

(blue) and P 1 (purple) values. Evolution of each scoring component over 350 steps, shown as 

both the average score and the span across t he peptides generated for 150 independent test 

cases, each performed with a batch size of 32. The scoring function used was (A) the 

probability of class 1 based on the raw model, (B) P 1-value from the CP -based calibrated 

model, (C) 1 - P0 -value from the CP -based calibrated model, (D) P 1- P0 value from the CP -

based calibrated model, (E) Harsh function based on conformal efficiency, and (F) the soft 

function. Note that for the P 1-value scoring function (B), the P 1-value tracked overlaps with the 

RL score which is why it is not visible. The same is true for the conformally efficient line in 

green and the harsh scoring function (E). Evolutions of each scoring component over 350 steps 

for the unique valid molecules, a re shown as both the average score and the span across the 

generated peptides for 149 independent test cases. 22 

Figure SI 4: Tracked scores of the experiments using different scoring functions for peptides 

with length 8. Average RL Score (grey), CP’s P 0 value (blue), P 1 value (purple) and the fraction 

of conformally efficient molecules predicted to be permeable (green) during the RL run. The 

plots include RL scores (grey) referring to score of the evaluated scoring function, CP’s P 0

(blue) and P 1 (purple) values. Evolution of each scoring component over 350 steps, shown as 

both the average score and the span across the peptides generated for 150 independent test 

cases, each performed with a batch size of 32. The scoring function used was (A) the 

probability of class 1 bas ed on the raw model, (B) P 1-value from the CP -based calibrated 

model, (C) 1 - P0 -value from the CP -based calibrated model, (D) P 1- P0 value from the CP -

based calibrated model, (E) Harsh function based on conformal efficiency, and (F) the soft 

function. Note that for the P 1-value scoring function (B), the P 1-value tracked overlaps with the 

RL score which is why it is not visible. The same is true for the conformally efficient line in 

green and the harsh scoring function (E). Evolutions of each scoring compon ent over 350 steps 

for the unique valid molecules, are shown as both the average score and the span across the 

generated peptides for 149 independent test cases. 23 

Figure SI 5: Tracked scores of the experiments using different scoring functions for peptides 

with length 9. Average RL Score (grey), CP’s P 0 value (blue), P 1 value (purple) and the fraction 

of conformally efficient molecules predicted to be permeable (green) during the RL run. The 

plots include RL scores (grey) referring to score of the evaluated scoring function, CP’s P 0

(blue) and P 1 (purple) values. Evolution of each scoring component over 350 steps, shown as 

both the average score and the span across the peptides generated for 150 independent test 

cases, each performed with a batch size of 32. The scoring function used was (A) the 

probability of class 1 based on the raw model, (B) P 1-value from the CP -based calibrated 

model, (C) 1 - P0 -value from the CP -based calibrated model, (D) P 1- P0 value from the CP -

based calibrated model, (E) Harsh function based on conformal efficiency, and (F) the soft 

function. Note that for the P 1-value scoring function (B), the P 1-value tracked overlaps with the 

RL score which is why it is not visible. The same is true for the conformally efficient line in 

green and the harsh scoring function (E). Evolutions of each scoring component over 350 steps 

for the unique valid molecules, are shown as both the average score and the span across th e

generated peptides for 149 independent test cases. 24 

Figure SI 6: Tracked scores of the experiments using different scoring functions for peptides 

with length 10 . Average RL Score (grey), CP’s P 0 value (blue), P 1 value (purple) and the 

fraction of conformally efficient molecules predicted to be permeable (green) during the RL 

run. The plots include RL scores (grey) referring to score of the evaluated scoring function, 

CP’s P 0 (blue) and P 1 (purple) values. Evolution of each scoring component over 350 steps, 

shown as both the average score and the span across the peptides generated for 150 

independent test cases, each performed with a batch size of 32. The scoring function used 

was (A) the p robability of class 1 based on the raw model, (B) P 1-value from the CP -based 

calibrated model, (C) 1 - P0 -value from the CP -based calibrated model, (D) P 1- P0 value from 

the CP -based calibrated model, (E) Harsh function based on conformal efficiency, and ( F) the 

soft function. Note that for the P 1-value scoring function (B), the P 1-value tracked overlaps with 

the RL score which is why it is not visible. The same is true for the conformally efficient line in 

green and the harsh scoring function (E). Evolutions of each scoring component over 350 steps 

for the unique valid molecules, a re shown as both the average score and the span across the 

generated peptides for 149 independent test cases. 25 

Figure SI 7: Tracked scores of the experiments using different scoring functions for peptides 

with length 11 . Average RL Score (grey), CP’s P 0 value (blue), P 1 value (purple) and the 

fraction of conformally efficient molecules predicted to be permeable (green) during the RL 

run. The plots include RL scores (grey) referring to score of the evaluated scoring function, 

CP’s P 0 (blue) and P 1 (purple) values. Evolution of each scoring component over 350 steps, 

shown as both the average score and the span across the peptides generated for 150 

independent test cases, each performed with a batch size of 32. The scoring function used 

was (A) the probability of class 1 based on the raw model, (B) P 1-value from the CP -based 

calibrated model, (C) 1 - P0 -value from the CP -based calibrated model, (D) P 1- P0 value from 

the CP -based calibrated model, (E) Harsh function based on conformal efficiency, and (F) the 

soft function. Note that for the P 1-value scoring function (B), the P 1-value tracked overlaps with 

the RL score which is why it is not visible. The same is true for the conformally efficient line in 

green and the harsh scoring function (E). Evolutions of each scoring component over 350 steps 

for the unique valid molecules, a re shown as both the average score and the span across the 

generated peptides for 149 independent test cases. 26 

Figure SI 8: Tracked scores of the experiments using different scoring functions for peptides 

with length 12 . Average RL Score (grey), CP’s P 0 value (blue), P 1 value (purple) and the 

fraction of conformally efficient molecules predicted to be permeable (green) during the RL 

run. The plots include RL scores (grey) referring to score of the evaluated scoring function, 

CP’s P 0 (blue) and P 1 (purple) values. Evolution of each scoring component over 350 steps, 

shown as both the average score and the span across the peptides generated for 150 

independent test cases, each performed with a batch size of 32. The scoring function used 

was (A) the probability of class 1 based on the raw model, (B) P 1-value from the CP -based 

calibrated model, (C) 1 - P0 -value from the CP -based calibrated model, (D) P 1- P0 value from 

the CP -based calibrated model, (E) Harsh function based on conformal efficiency, and (F) the 

soft function. Note that for the P 1-value scoring function (B), the P 1-value tracked overlaps with 

the RL score whi ch is why it is not visible. The same is true for the conformally efficient line in 

green and the harsh scoring function (E). Evolutions of each scoring component over 350 steps 

for the unique valid molecules, are shown as both the average score and the sp an across the 

generated peptides for 149 independent test cases.