Title: AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein-Ligand Docking Poses

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03707v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 01:12:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 68

Markdown Content:
# AGENTIC POSES RANKER : A N AGENTIC AI F RAMEWORK FOR 

# PHYSICALLY GROUNDED RANKING OF PROTEIN –L IGAND 

# DOCKING POSES 

Sofiene Khiari ∗†‡ Amr H. Mahmoud ∗† Markus A. Lill ∗†

# ABSTRACT 

Scoring functions remain the principal bottleneck in molecular docking: they routinely fail to rank near-native poses above decoys, and their composite single-score design obscures the physicochemical basis of each ranking error. We present AgenticPosesRanker, an agentic AI framework that combines six deterministic, physically grounded analysis tools (interaction fingerprinting, solvent-accessible burial, conformational strain, steric-clash detection, unsatisfied-polar-atom penalty, and chemical-identity extraction) with large-language-model (GPT-5) chain-of-thought reasoning to evaluate and rank docking poses. On a curated benchmark of ten protein–ligand systems (162 poses) balanced by construction between Smina scoring-function successes and failures, the agent achieved 50.0% best-pose accuracy, matching the design-fixed Smina baseline of 50.0% and significantly exceeding a 7.7% uniformly random baseline ( p < 0.001 , one-sided exact binomial test). The balanced-benchmark accuracy decomposes symmetrically: the agent retained 80% (4/5) of the Smina-success systems and recovered 20% (1/5) of the Smina-failure systems, so the aggregate 50% reflects one regression offset by one recovery rather than any net improvement over the Smina reference. Decision-attribution analysis showed high alignment between the agent’s self-reported tool weights and objective metric separations of the selected pose (median ρ = +0 .83 ), consistent across correct and incorrect outcomes, localising the performance ceiling to tool-suite coverage rather than reasoning inconsistency. These results establish a methodological template for evaluating agentic AI against objective ground truth in the natural sciences and position the framework as an interpretable curation layer for late-stage pose refinement in structure-based drug design. 

# 1 Introduction 

Molecular docking is a cornerstone of structure-based drug design, yet its utility is limited by a persistent gap between sampling and scoring: modern docking programs generate at least one near-native pose in the vast majority of cases, but their scoring functions rank that pose first far less reliably. The bottleneck is not geometric search but energetic evaluation. The Gibbs free energy of binding would, in principle, be the single correct ranking criterion, but conventional scoring functions approximate it through heavily simplified functional forms that collapse van der Waals, electrostatic, desolvation, and torsional contributions into a small number of terms with fixed weights, neglecting conformational entropy and solvent reorganisation and assuming additivity where the underlying physics is coupled [ 1, 2 , 3 ]. Because neither the relative importance of each term nor the coupling between terms is constant across binding sites, the resulting score is an unreliable surrogate for the true ∆G, particularly when closely ranked poses differ in the balance of their physicochemical trade-offs. Rescoring approaches, consensus methods, and machine-learning models have improved ranking accuracy, but each carries characteristic limitations: physics-based rescorers are computationally expensive and still rely on fixed functional forms; consensus protocols apply uniform weights across all targets; data-driven models achieve high accuracy yet operate as opaque functions whose predictions resist mechanistic interrogation. 

> ∗

Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland 

> †

Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Basel, Switzerland 

> ‡

Corresponding author: research@sofk.ch 

> arXiv:2605.03707v1 [q-bio.BM] 5 May 2026

AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses A complementary strategy is to preserve each physicochemical observable as a separate, interpretable input and delegate the integration step to an explicit reasoning process. Large language models, when equipped with domain-specific tools and structured evaluation guidelines, can perform this kind of multi-criterion scientific reasoning, weighing competing evidence, adapting emphasis to context, and articulating the rationale behind each decision. Such agentic AI systems have been applied to synthesis planning, reaction optimisation, and molecular property prediction, but no prior work has evaluated an agentic framework for pose ranking against a crystallographic ground-truth benchmark with quantitative metrics for accuracy, reasoning faithfulness, and decision attribution. This paper presents AgenticPosesRanker, an agentic AI framework that couples deterministic, physically grounded analysis tools with large-language-model reasoning to rank docking poses through chain-of-thought scientific evaluation. We evaluate the framework on a curated crystallographic benchmark balanced by construction between scoring-function successes and failures, quantifying ranking accuracy, the alignment between stated tool weights and objective metric separations, and decision attribution, together constituting an evaluation template absent from prior agentic chemistry studies. On this ten-system benchmark the agent attains 50.0% best-pose accuracy, numerically matching the design-fixed Smina baseline while significantly exceeding a 7.7% uniformly random baseline, and decomposes symmetrically into 80% retention of Smina’s correct rankings (4/5) and 20% recovery of its failures (1/5). Decision-attribution analysis traces the asymmetry to gaps in tool-suite coverage rather than to deficiencies in the reasoning process itself. This finding establishes a methodological template for the rigorous evaluation of agentic AI systems against objective ground truth in the natural sciences. The following section reviews the relevant background on docking, scoring paradigms, and agentic AI to contextualise this contribution. 

# 2 Background and Related Work 

2.1 Molecular Docking and the Pose-Ranking Problem Docking as a two-stage process. Molecular docking predicts the preferred orientation of a small-molecule ligand within a protein binding site by computationally generating and evaluating candidate bound conformations, termed 

poses [4]. The process is conventionally decomposed into two sequential stages. First, a sampling algorithm explores the conformational and orientational space to produce a diverse ensemble of candidate geometries; modern programs employ search strategies including stochastic global optimisation [ 1, 5], genetic algorithms, and incremental-construction methods. Second, a scoring function evaluates each sampled pose and ranks the ensemble, ideally placing the conformation closest to the experimentally observed binding mode at the top. In practice, the scoring function is the weaker of the two stages. In a comparative evaluation on the Astex Diverse set, sampling algorithms generated at least one near-native pose (RMSD < 2 Å) in 85–99% of cases, yet the corresponding scoring functions ranked that pose first in only 35–73% of cases [ 6]. The gap between sampling and ranking success was present for every program tested: AutoDock Vina exhibited the largest disconnect (93.4% sampling versus 35–40% ranking, a gap exceeding 50 percentage points), but FlexX (30 pp), FlexAID (29 pp), and rDock (25–27 pp) all showed ranking success rates well below their sampling rates [ 6 ]. A broader benchmark of ten programs across 2 002 complexes confirmed that the best sampling program is not the best ranking program and that no single approach excels at both tasks [ 7]. These observations establish that the principal bottleneck in structure-based pose prediction lies not in the search algorithm but in the scoring function, a limitation that motivates the rescoring and multi-criteria approaches discussed in the following subsections. 

Near-native pose identification and RMSD. The accuracy of a docking prediction is conventionally quantified by the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) between the heavy atoms of the predicted pose and the crystallographically determined binding mode. A pose with RMSD < 2.0 Å to the native structure is classified as near-native , reproducing the experimentally observed ligand placement; poses in the range 2.0–4.0 Å occupy an ambiguous intermediate zone, while those exceeding 4.0 Å are considered non-native [ 4, 8]. The 2.0 Å near-native threshold has become the de facto standard across major benchmarking campaigns, including the Comparative Assessment of Scoring Functions (CASF) [ 8 ] and evaluations on the Astex Diverse set [ 9]. For molecules that contain chemically equivalent atom permutations, such as symmetric aromatic rings or carboxylate groups, naive RMSD calculations can yield artificially inflated values; symmetry-corrected variants based on graph isomorphism resolve this problem [10]. Because RMSD compares atomic coordinates directly against an experimental reference, it provides a geometry-based ground truth that is independent of any scoring function. This independence is its principal strength: it allows sampling success (whether a near-native pose exists in the ensemble) and ranking success (whether the scoring function places it first) to be assessed separately, the distinction exploited in the benchmarks discussed above. Nevertheless, RMSD has recognised limitations. Poses within the 2.0 Å threshold can exhibit substantially different calculated protein–ligand interaction energies [ 3 ], indicating that geometric proximity to the native mode does not guarantee energetically 2AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses favourable binding. These caveats motivate the complementary quality metrics defined alongside each analysis tool in the Methods (Sections 3.2.1–3.2.7). 

The pose-ranking problem as multi-criteria decision-making. In principle, the Gibbs free energy of binding would be the single correct criterion for pose ranking: if the enthalpic and entropic contributions could be computed exactly, the pose with the most favourable ∆G would, by definition, represent the best prediction. Current scoring functions, however, approximate this free energy through heavily simplified functional forms. They typically collapse van der Waals, electrostatic, desolvation, and torsional contributions into a small number of weighted terms whose coefficients are fitted to reproduce experimental binding affinities [ 1, 5 ]. Entropic effects (ligand conformational entropy, the reorganisation of solvent molecules upon binding) and desolvation penalties for buried polar groups are either absorbed into global fitting weights or neglected entirely [ 3, 2]. Because the resulting score is a coarse approximation rather than a rigorous free-energy estimate, it can assign high ranks to poses that violate basic physical constraints and penalise poses that are thermodynamically sound. Recognising these limitations motivates an alternative strategy: rather than relying on a single approximate ∆G, one can compute several complementary physicochemical descriptors from the docked structure and reason over them jointly. These include non-covalent interaction quality (hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts, salt bridges [ 2 ]), conformational strain [ 11 ], steric clashes, binding-site burial, and satisfaction of buried polar atoms through compensatory hydrogen bonds [ 12 ]. These descriptors, however, do not represent independent, additive contributions to the binding free energy. The thermodynamic value of a hydrogen bond depends on the desolvation cost of the participating groups, which is itself a function of burial depth; conformational strain modulates both interaction geometry and solvent exposure simultaneously [ 2 , 3]. Scoring functions that model ∆G as a fixed-weight linear combination of such terms assume additivity where the underlying physics is coupled, and fix the relative importance of each term where the balance shifts with binding-site context. This coupling also means that the descriptors can conflict at the observable level: a deeply buried pose may exhibit elevated conformational strain, while a conformation rich in hydrogen bonds may simultaneously introduce steric overlaps with the protein. A fixed-weight composite score cannot arbitrate these trade-offs, because neither the linear functional form nor the training objective (affinity prediction) captures the non-linear, context-dependent relationships among the descriptors [ 4 , 7]. The gap between what a rigorous free-energy calculation would provide and what current scoring functions actually deliver motivates the detailed examination of scoring-function paradigms in Section 2.2 and of reasoning-based approaches that can integrate these coupled descriptors through context-adaptive reasoning rather than predetermined weights, as explored in Section 2.3. 

2.2 Scoring Function Limitations and the Interpretability Gap 

Scoring functions fall into three broad paradigm families. Empirical scorers, such as AutoDock Vina [ 1] and Smina [ 5], model the binding free energy as a weighted sum of steric, hydrophobic, hydrogen-bonding, and torsional terms calibrated against experimental affinities. Knowledge-based methods instead derive distance-dependent pseudo-energies from observed protein–ligand contact frequencies in the Protein Data Bank [ 13 , 14 ]. Machine-learning approaches learn non-linear mappings directly from structural data: Gnina trains a CNN ensemble on 22.5 million poses and raises top-1 redocking accuracy from 58 % (Vina) to 73 % [ 15 , 16 ], while diffusion models such as DiffDock frame docking as sampling over SE(3) manifolds [ 17 ]. Consensus scoring combines rankings from multiple functions to reduce false positives, raising pose-prediction success from 66–76 % individually to approximately 80 % or higher [ 18 , 19 ], but applies a fixed aggregation rule that cannot adapt to binding-site context [ 20 ]. A detailed comparative analysis of scoring-function performance across major benchmarks is provided in Supplementary Section A.1. All three paradigm families, and the consensus combinations built on top of them, share a structural limitation. Because their functional forms omit or crudely approximate conformational entropy, solvent reorganisation, and desolvation penalties for buried polar groups [ 3 , 2], the aggregate score is an unreliable surrogate for the true binding free energy. A medicinal chemist cannot determine from a Vina score whether the top-ranked pose was preferred because of strong hydrogen bonds despite moderate strain, or because the simplified functional form rewarded a large hydrophobic contact area [ 2 ]. Machine-learning methods compound this opacity: CNN confidence scores and diffusion likelihoods provide no reasoning trace, and the PoseBusters validation framework showed that many deep-learning methods generate poses with steric clashes, incorrect stereochemistry, or non-standard bond geometries [ 12 ]. No existing benchmark assesses whether a method can articulate which observable properties drove its ranking and how competing criteria were weighed against one another [ 8 , 4]. Across all paradigm families, scoring functions therefore operate as recommendation systems without explanations, a property that limits their utility for the iterative, hypothesis-driven decisions that characterise structure-based drug design. Bridging this interpretability gap requires two components: (i) a set of independently computed physicochemical descriptors that characterise each pose along multiple dimensions, and (ii) a reasoning mechanism that integrates these descriptors through context-adaptive logic rather than predetermined weights. The descriptors used in this work 3AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses (non-covalent interaction profiles, solvent exposure and burial, conformational strain, steric clash counts, and unsatisfied polar atom penalties) are defined and formalised in the Methods (Sections 3.2.1–3.2.7), where each tool’s algorithm, geometric criteria, and scientific basis are presented together. The reasoning mechanism is introduced in the following subsection. 

2.3 Large Language Models and Agentic AI for Scientific Reasoning 

The interpretability gap identified above leaves a question: how can multiple physicochemical descriptors be integrated without collapsing them into a single scalar? 

Tool-augmented LLM agents. A tool-augmented large-language-model (LLM) agent pairs a foundation model with a suite of external tools, computational programs, databases, or instrument interfaces, that the model invokes through a structured observe–reason–act loop [ 21 ]. At each step the model inspects tool outputs, formulates a reasoning trace, and selects the next action, iterating until the task objective is met. This paradigm differs from two established alternatives: end-to-end machine-learning scoring, where a single model learns the complete mapping from molecular inputs to predicted outputs, and retrieval-augmented generation, where the model retrieves and summarises textual passages but does not invoke computational procedures. In chemistry, ChemCrow demonstrated the paradigm by coupling GPT-4 with eighteen chemistry tools in a ReAct-style orchestration layer, enabling synthesis planning, insect-repellent design, and chromophore discovery; expert evaluators judged its outputs more accurate than those of the unaugmented model [ 22 ]. Coscientist extended the approach to autonomous experimental orchestration, directing robotic platforms to optimise palladium-catalysed cross-coupling reactions through iterative search, code execution, and documentation lookup [ 23 ]. These systems are distinct from domain-specific fine-tuned models such as MoleculeGPT, where the language model is the predictor; in a tool-augmented agent the model serves as a reasoning orchestrator while computation is delegated to verified external tools. Despite growing adoption, existing agentic chemistry systems evaluate task-completion accuracy on domain-specific benchmarks (molecular-property prediction, synthesis feasibility, drug–target interaction scoring); none has been applied to docking pose ranking, where accuracy is defined by RMSD agreement with a crystallographic reference structure rather than by a predicted property or categorical answer. To date, no tool-augmented chemistry agent has therefore reported quantitative pose-ranking accuracy, faithfulness, or decision-attribution metrics against such a benchmark, leaving open the question of whether agentic reasoning can match or complement physics-based scoring in structural pose evaluation. 

Chain-of-thought reasoning and transparency. Chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting elicits explicit step-by-step reasoning from large language models by providing exemplars that demonstrate intermediate reasoning steps before arriving at a final answer [ 24 ]. On arithmetic, commonsense, and symbolic-reasoning benchmarks, CoT prompting improved accuracy by substantial margins, up to 17 percentage points on GSM-8K for PaLM 540B, by decomposing complex queries into sequential sub-goals that the model addresses incrementally [ 24 ]. Subsequent work revealed that models retain 80–90 % of their CoT-elicited performance even when the exemplar reasoning steps are logically invalid, indicating that much of the benefit derives from adopting a structured output format rather than from faithfully executing each intermediate step [ 25 ]. Coupling the natural-language trace with deterministic symbolic solvers, an approach termed Faithful CoT , recovered both accuracy (state-of-the-art on 7 of 10 evaluation tasks) and verifiability by ensuring that the computational portion of the reasoning chain is symbolically correct [ 26 ]. Beyond accuracy, CoT reasoning offers a transparency mechanism absent from the single-scalar scoring paradigms surveyed in Section 2.2: the reasoning trace makes the model’s stated decision process inspectable and auditable. In an analytical context, such a trace can reference specific measurements, thresholds, and trade-offs, producing a structured argument analogous to a domain expert’s written assessment rather than an opaque aggregate score. The scientific utility of this transparency, however, depends critically on whether the verbalised reasoning faithfully represents the factors that actually determined the model’s output, a concern that recent work on CoT faithfulness has shown to be well-founded [27]. 

Reasoning faithfulness and hallucination risks. The transparency benefits of chain-of-thought reasoning are contingent on a non-trivial assumption: that the verbalised reasoning trace faithfully reflects the factors that actually determined the model’s output [ 27 ]. Turpin et al. demonstrated that introducing biasing features, such as a suggested answer from a purportedly authoritative source, caused accuracy drops of up to 36 percentage points, yet the resulting chain-of-thought explanations almost never mentioned these biases; in 73 % of cases the model produced a plausible but fabricated justification that supported the bias-influenced answer [ 27 ]. Lanham et al. formalised this concern through a suite of intervention-based faithfulness tests, truncating the chain midway, injecting deliberate mistakes, and inserting filler tokens, and found that, counterintuitively, larger and more capable models were often less faithful: on seven of eight evaluation tasks, a 13-billion-parameter model exhibited higher faithfulness scores than its 175-billion-parameter counterpart [ 28 ]. These findings indicate that the mere presence of a reasoning trace does not guarantee its explanatory validity; models can produce coherent post-hoc rationalisations that bear little relation to their internal 4AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses decision process [ 25 ]. A related concern is hallucination: large language models can generate plausible-sounding but factually incorrect claims, a risk that extends to scientific contexts where the model may report interactions, properties, or trends that no underlying computation actually produced. Taken together, unfaithful reasoning and hallucination represent fundamental reliability challenges for any framework that presents LLM-generated reasoning as an auditable scientific justification. Mitigating these risks requires architectural safeguards, grounding the model’s reasoning in verified tool outputs rather than parametric memory, and providing quantitative means to assess whether stated decision factors align with objective evidence, design considerations explored in Section 3.4. 

Positional bias and evaluation fairness. When large language models process ordered lists, their attention to individual items depends systematically on position. Liu et al. demonstrated this “lost in the middle” phenomenon: models retrieve information far more reliably from the beginning and end of their input context than from intermediate positions, producing a characteristic U-shaped performance curve across question-answering and retrieval tasks [ 29 ]. The effect extends directly to evaluation settings. In multiple-choice benchmarks spanning 20 models, relocating the correct answer from position A to position D reduced accuracy by up to 15 percentage points, and option-selection proportions dropped monotonically from 34.6% for the first option to 15.8% for the last, revealing a strong primacy bias [ 30 ]. For listwise ranking, permutation self-consistency, shuffling the input list, collecting independent rankings, and aggregating by majority vote, improved accuracy by 7–18% for GPT-3.5 and 8–16% for LLaMA-2 70B, confirming that positional bias materially distorts rank-order judgements [ 31 ]. These findings have direct implications for any framework that asks an LLM to rank molecular poses. If the model systematically favours poses presented early in its context window, rankings will reflect input ordering rather than physicochemical merit. To mitigate this risk, our system applies a deterministic anonymisation protocol that replaces all pose identifiers with SHA-256-derived codes and sanitises structural metadata before the model encounters the ranking task (Section 3.3). Anonymisation eliminates label-based bias, the model cannot infer original rank from an opaque identifier, but neither the anonymisation protocol nor the current pipeline implementation randomises presentation order: poses are presented in a fixed sequence across runs, and positional effects therefore remain an uncontrolled confound (Section 5.4). It is best understood as a necessary but not sufficient safeguard, complemented by explicit anti-bias instructions in the agent’s system prompt. 

2.4 Evaluation Frameworks and Benchmarks for Docking 

Sections 2.2 and 2.3 together define the components of a reasoning-based pose-ranking system: the interpretability gap that motivates multi-descriptor evaluation, and an LLM agent that integrates these descriptors through transparent reasoning. Evaluating such a system requires benchmarks with crystallographic ground truth and sufficient structural diversity. 

PDBbind and CASF benchmarks. The PDBbind database, introduced by Wang et al. [ 32 , 33 ], provides the largest curated collection of protein–ligand complexes for which both three-dimensional crystal structures and experimentally determined binding affinities, dissociation constants ( Kd) or inhibition constants ( Ki), are available. Updated annually since its first public release in 2004, PDBbind organises its entries into three nested tiers of increasing quality: a general set encompassing all qualifying complexes, a refined set filtered for crystallographic resolution better than 2.5 Å, unambiguous binding data, and binary complex topology, and a core set in which entries are further clustered by protein-sequence similarity to ensure target diversity [ 8]. This hierarchical design serves dual roles: the general and refined sets supply training data for scoring-function development, while the core set provides a compact, non-redundant evaluation benchmark. The Comparative Assessment of Scoring Functions (CASF) is the companion benchmarking protocol built on successive PDBbind core sets. CASF evaluates scoring functions along four complementary tasks, scoring power (correlation with experimental affinities), ranking power (correct ordering of ligands within a target cluster), docking power (identification of a near-native pose among decoys), and screening power (enrichment of true binders from a mixed library) [ 8 ]. The most recent iteration, CASF-2016, tested 25 scoring functions on 285 core-set complexes partitioned into 57 target clusters and confirmed that no single function excels across all four tasks, underscoring the multifaceted nature of scoring-function quality [ 8]. Francoeur et al. [ 16 ] extended the PDBbind ecosystem by generating large-scale docking ensembles with Smina for thousands of PDBbind systems, including both self-docking (re-docking) and cross-docking configurations; these pre-computed pose sets, with crystal-structure ground truth, have since been widely reused for scoring-function evaluation and machine-learning training [ 15 ]. The present benchmark draws its protein structures from PDBbind 2016 and its Smina-generated docked poses from the Francoeur et al. dataset (Section 3.6). 

Evaluation metrics and the reasoning gap. Among the CASF evaluation dimensions, docking power, the percentage of systems for which the top-ranked pose falls within 2.0 Å RMSD of the crystal structure, is the task most directly comparable to pose-ranking accuracy, with values ranging from approximately 60 % to 90 % across the 25 scoring functions tested in CASF-2016 under self-docking conditions [ 8 ]. Self-docking success rates for the best-performing 5AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses programs typically range from 60 % to 80 % across large PDBbind-derived test sets [ 7, 8]; under cross-docking conditions, where a ligand is docked into a receptor conformation crystallised with a different ligand, success rates decline substantially due to receptor-conformation mismatch [ 16 , 15 ]. However, all four CASF tasks quantify what ascoring function selects, a top pose, an affinity estimate, a rank, or an enriched compound set, without examining why that selection was made. Inspecting the individual terms of an empirical scoring function (van der Waals, hydrogen-bonding, torsional contributions) does reveal which fitted energy components favoured a given pose [ 1 , 3], but these terms report the output of simplified functional forms rather than independently verified structural properties: a favourable hydrogen-bonding term does not indicate whether the underlying donor–acceptor geometries are well-formed, nor whether the associated desolvation cost has been accounted for [ 2]. No existing benchmarking protocol evaluates whether the factors cited for a ranking, whether expressed as a scoring-term decomposition or as an explicit decision trace, align with physicochemical evidence computed independently of the scoring function, leaving the faithfulness of ranking decisions outside the scope of current evaluation frameworks. 

Statistical considerations for small-sample evaluation. Docking-benchmark design forces a trade-off between statistical power and evaluation depth. Large-scale benchmarks such as CASF-2016 [ 8] evaluate hundreds of complexes, yielding narrow confidence intervals around aggregate metrics, top-1 success rates, Pearson correlations, Spearman rank coefficients, but the sheer volume of systems restricts assessment to a single numerical score per complex. Conversely, small, carefully curated benchmarks can support detailed per-system analyses, complete reasoning traces, metric decomposition across physical observables, and faithfulness measurement between stated rationales and the underlying evidence, yet the resulting sample sizes introduce substantial uncertainty into any point estimate of accuracy. For success rates estimated from small benchmarks, the standard normal (Wald) approximation to the binomial confidence interval is known to produce coverage well below the nominal level, particularly when the true proportion lies near zero or one [ 34 ]. The Wilson score interval [ 35 ] corrects this deficiency by inverting the score test rather than the Wald test, guaranteeing coverage that remains close to the stated confidence level even for sample sizes as low as ten. Complementarily, an exact one-sided binomial test can evaluate whether an observed success count is significantly greater than a random-selection baseline, providing a formal hypothesis test that does not rely on asymptotic assumptions. Reporting such uncertainty ranges alongside point estimates is essential whenever the number of evaluated systems is small, because a single additional success or failure can shift the estimated accuracy by a large margin. The present study deliberately restricts the benchmark to a small number of systems (Section 3.6) in order to permit the depth of evaluation, complete reasoning traces, decision attribution, and faithfulness quantification, that would be infeasible at the scale of CASF-2016’s 285 complexes. This design choice is accompanied throughout by Wilson confidence intervals and exact binomial tests so that the statistical limitations of the sample size remain transparent. The following section describes the concrete realisation of this approach: the analysis tools, agent architecture, benchmark construction, and evaluation protocol. 

# 3 Methods 

3.1 System Overview 

Rather than learning a single composite scoring function, the system delegates each physical observable to a dedicated, independently validated computational chemistry tool and then asks an LLM to reason over the collected evidence. The overall architecture is summarised in Figure 1 and the end-to-end pipeline is described below. 

Inputs. The pipeline accepts two categories of input files: (i) a protein structure in PDB format and (ii) one or more candidate ligand poses in SDF format (PDB format is also supported; SDF files are converted to PDB internally via RDKit [36]). Each pose file contains a single docked conformation of the ligand. 

Preprocessing. Before any analysis is performed, the protein structure undergoes a filtering step implemented in a dedicated module. This step removes all non-essential HETATM records, including co-crystallised ligands, crystallisation additives, detergents, glycans, and buffer components, while preserving water molecules and catalytically relevant metal ions (Zn, Mg, Ca, Fe, Mn, Co, Ni, Cu). The rationale is to prevent co-crystallised ligands or other heteroatoms from interfering with the downstream PLIP interaction analysis, which should detect contacts only between the protein and the docked pose under evaluation. For each pose, a protein-ligand complex file is then constructed by concatenating the filtered protein coordinates with the ligand atoms. During this step, ligand atoms are assigned a chain identifier (required by BioPython’s SASA calculator) and atom serial numbers are renumbered to continue from the protein’s last serial, ensuring valid PDB formatting. All CONECT records are placed at the end of the file to satisfy BioPython’s parser requirements. 6AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Figure 1: Architecture of the AgenticPosesRanker framework. The pipeline accepts a protein structure (PDB) and one or more docked ligand poses (SDF) as inputs. After protein filtering and complex construction, each pose is evaluated by six primary analysis tools covering non-covalent interactions, solvent exposure, conformational strain, steric clashes, polar desolvation penalties, and chemical identity verification (via SMILES extraction, not used for ranking). Three derived tools then assess interaction quality, binding mode, and ligand efficiency from the primary outputs. All tool results are written to anonymised analysis files identified only by eight-character SHA-256-derived codes, preventing the LLM from inferring pose identity or ordering. The anonymised files are submitted together with a domain-specific system prompt to a GPT-5 agent with chain-of-thought reasoning enabled. The agent returns a ranked list of poses with a structured justification referencing specific metric values. Anonymous codes are automatically replaced with original pose names in the final output. 

Analysis tools. Each complex is passed through six primary analysis tools that compute physical and structural observables. These tools are: 1. PLIP interaction profiling : detection of hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts, π-stacking, salt bridges, and water bridges with full geometric parameters; 2. Solvent exposure (SASA) : Solvent-accessible surface area and burial ratio; 3. Conformational strain : MMFF94 energy difference between the bound conformation and a force-field-optimised reference; 4. Steric clash detection : van der Waals overlap count, energy, and severity; 5. Unsatisfied polar penalty : identification of buried polar atoms lacking compensatory hydrogen bonds; 6. SMILES extraction : canonical isomeric SMILES for chemical identity verification (not used for ranking). Three additional derived assessment tools then operate on the outputs of the primary tools: 7. Interaction quality assessment : geometry-based quality scoring of each interaction detected by PLIP; 8. Binding mode classification : classification of each pose as deep_pocket , partial_pocket , or surface 

based on ligand burial ratio; 9. Ligand efficiency assessment : normalisation of interaction counts and quality by the number of heavy atoms. All tools are executed sequentially for each pose. The primary tools each write their results to both a human-readable log file (retaining the original pose name) and an anonymised analysis file (see below). After all primary tools have 7AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses completed, the three derived tools read the existing analysis files, compute their metrics, and append the results before the analysis files are finalised. 

Pose anonymisation. To prevent the LLM from inferring pose identity or ordering from filenames (e.g. pose_01.sdf 

versus pose_09.sdf ), every pose is assigned a deterministic eight-character base-36 code generated by hashing the concatenation of a system identifier and the pose name with SHA-256. The analysis files are named after these anonymous codes and are purged of any residual references to the original filenames before being passed to the LLM. 

LLM reasoning. The anonymised analysis files, one per pose, are concatenated into a single textual context and submitted to the LLM together with a domain-specific system prompt. We use OpenAI’s GPT-5 model accessed through the OpenAI Agents SDK (version 0.5.0), with chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning enabled at effort="high" and reasoning summary set to "detailed" , together with model verbosity set to "high" . All other sampling parameters were left at the SDK’s defaults for reasoning models: temperature, top-p, and frequency and presence penalties were not explicitly set (GPT-5’s reasoning endpoint does not accept user-supplied values for these parameters at the time of evaluation), no random seed was supplied, and no explicit max_tokens limit was imposed, relying on the model’s internal length budget under the high-effort and high-verbosity settings. The system prompt ( ∼7 800 words) encodes: (i) complete documentation of each tool’s algorithm, output format, and interpretation guidelines; (ii) a hierarchical decision framework that prioritises binding mode and interaction quality over raw interaction counts, and uses conformational strain, steric clashes, and polar penalties as tiebreakers; (iii) explicit anti-bias instructions (e.g. "surface binders should never rank first, even with high interaction counts"); (iv) structured output requirements specifying the expected sections of the response (best pose selection, comparative analysis, confidence assessment, and recommendations). The prompt was refined iteratively against exploratory PDBbind 2016 systems during development. These exploratory systems were not formally held out from the ten benchmark systems reported in Table 1, and we cannot guarantee full disjointness between the prompt-tuning set and the evaluation set; this transparency disclosure is revisited in Section 5.7. The agent processes all analysis files in a single inference call and returns (a) a chain-of-thought reasoning trace and (b) a structured final answer containing the selected best pose, a metric-by-metric justification, a comparative analysis of runner-up poses, and a self-assessed confidence level. After inference, the anonymous codes in the agent’s output are automatically mapped back to the original pose names for human-readable reporting. 

Outputs. The pipeline produces three categories of output: (i) per-pose analysis log files with the full tool outputs; (ii) scientific visualisation plots summarising the metric distributions across all poses (generated using Matplotlib and Seaborn); and (iii) a comprehensive ranking log that records the system prompt, the anonymised analysis context sent to the model, the chain-of-thought reasoning, and the final ranking with justification. 

User interfaces. AgenticPosesRanker is accessible through two complementary front-ends, a Streamlit [ 37 ] web application and a Typer-based command-line interface, both of which share the same analysis and ranking back-end. The web application provides an interactive graphical environment in which users can upload structures, visualise protein-ligand complexes in 3D via an embedded Mol* [ 38 ] viewer, monitor pipeline progress in real time, and conduct follow-up conversations with the agent after the initial ranking. The interface is described in Section 3.5, with full layout and configuration details in Supplementary Section A.3. 

Design principles. Two principles guided the design of the framework: • Tool-augmented reasoning: The LLM does not predict binding scores or learn a scoring function. Instead, it reasons over pre-computed observables produced by established computational chemistry tools (RDKit, PLIP, BioPython). This decouples the physical evaluation, which is deterministic, from the multi-criteria decision-making, which benefits from the LLM’s ability to handle conflicting signals (e.g. high strain compensated by a strong interaction network). • Explainability by design: Every ranking decision is accompanied by chain-of-thought reasoning and a structured justification that explicitly references specific metric values. This transparency enables domain experts to audit, critique, and override the agent’s conclusions, a property absent from conventional black-box scoring functions. 8AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

3.2 Analysis Tools 3.2.1 Protein-Ligand Interaction Profiling (PLIP) 

We characterise the non-covalent interaction network between each docked pose and the protein using the Protein-Ligand Interaction Profiler (PLIP) version 3.0 [ 39 , 40 , 41 ]. PLIP applies a deterministic, rule-based algorithm that identifies interactions through geometric criteria (distance and angle cutoffs) derived from the structural biology literature. Because no trainable parameters are involved, the analysis is fully deterministic. We invoke PLIP through its Python API and load the pre-assembled protein-ligand complex PDB file produced during the preprocessing step (Section 3.1). After loading, the module automatically detects all heteroatom groups present in the structure. To avoid spurious interaction reports, we skip common non-ligand heteroatom groups, specifically HOH, WAT, CA, MG, ZN, NA, CL, SO 4, and PO 4, before calling characterize_complex() on the first valid ligand detected. Only one ligand per complex is analysed, corresponding to the single docked pose under evaluation. Five categories of non-covalent interactions are extracted, each accompanied by per-contact geometric parameters: 1. Hydrogen bonds: Both ligand-donor and protein-donor orientations are tracked separately. For each hydrogen bond, the donor-acceptor distance dAD (Å) and the donor-H-acceptor angle θ (°) are recorded. 2. Hydrophobic contacts: Non-polar atom pairs within a distance cutoff of 4.0 Å are reported with their inter-atomic distance (Å). 3. π-Stacking interactions: Ring-ring contacts between aromatic systems on the ligand and the protein are detected and classified as parallel (face-to-face; inter-ring angle < 30 °) or T-shaped (edge-to-face; angle 

≥ 30 °). The centroid-centroid distance (Å), inter-ring angle (°), and lateral offset (Å) are recorded for each contact. 4. Salt bridges: Ionic interactions between oppositely charged groups are recorded with their distance (Å), distinguishing ligand-negative/protein-positive from ligand-positive/protein-negative pairings. 5. Water bridges: Water-mediated hydrogen bonds that bridge ligand and protein atoms are reported with two distances: the ligand-water distance dAW (Å) and the water-protein distance dDW (Å). For each pose, the tool produces two complementary outputs: (i) a formatted text report listing every detected contact with its participating residues and full geometric parameters, and (ii) a structured data dictionary that organises interaction details per ligand and provides aggregate counts (total interactions and per-type subtotals for hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts, π-stacking, salt bridges, and water bridges). The structured output is used by the downstream interaction quality and ligand efficiency assessment tools (Section 3.2.7), while the formatted report is written to the anonymised analysis file consumed by the LLM. The geometric parameters recorded by PLIP serve a dual purpose in the agentic pipeline. First, they enable the agent to distinguish high-quality interactions (e.g. hydrogen bonds with dAD ≈ 2.8-3.2 Å and θ ≈ 160 -180 °) from marginal ones that satisfy PLIP’s detection cutoffs but contribute little to binding stability. Second, directionality and redundancy information, such as whether a single atom participates in multiple hydrogen bonds simultaneously, is available for the agent to assess network plausibility rather than relying on raw interaction counts. 

3.2.2 Solvent Exposure Assessment (SASA) 

We quantify the degree to which each docked ligand is buried within the protein binding pocket by computing atomic solvent-accessible surface areas (SASA) using the Shrake-Rupley algorithm [ 42 ] as implemented in BioPython [ 43 ]version 1.86. Ligand burial is a necessary prerequisite for specific binding: poses that remain largely solvent-exposed are almost invariably docking artefacts rather than productive binding modes. The calculation is performed on the full protein-ligand complex PDB file produced during preprocessing (Section 3.1). After parsing the structure with BioPython, the ShrakeRupley calculator is invoked at atomic resolution ( level="A" ). SASA is computed on the complete protein-ligand complex, so that per-atom values reflect the combined shielding from the protein surface and from neighboring ligand atoms. This yields the effective solvent accessibility in the bound state, which is the quantity consumed by the downstream polar penalty tool (Section 3.2.5). The approach does not, however, distinguish protein-contributed burial from intramolecular self-occlusion: atoms in concave regions of the ligand may register low SASA even without protein shielding, inflating the apparent burial ratio. A ∆SASA decomposition (subtracting complex SASA from isolated-ligand SASA per atom) would isolate the protein-specific contribution and produce a more precise burial metric for both the polar penalty assessment and the binding-mode classification, but is not implemented in the current version. 9AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses Ligand atoms are then identified by excluding standard amino-acid residues (detected via BioPython’s is_aa() ) and the same set of non-ligand heteroatom groups excluded by the PLIP analysis (HOH, WAT, CA, MG, ZN, NA, CL, SO 4,PO 4). Only the first valid ligand residue is processed, corresponding to the single docked pose under evaluation. From the per-atom SASA values we derive six summary statistics: • Total SASA: the sum of SASA values across all ligand atoms (Å 2). • Average SASA: the mean SASA per ligand atom (Å 2), serving as the principal burial indicator. • Maximum and minimum SASA: the highest and lowest per-atom SASA values (Å 2), indicating heterogeneity in ligand exposure. • Exposed and buried atom counts: atoms are classified as buried if their SASA is below a threshold of 1.0 Å 2

and as exposed otherwise. • Burial ratio: the fraction of ligand atoms classified as buried, expressed as a percentage. The average SASA is further mapped to one of three qualitative categories that are reported alongside the numerical metrics: highly buried (average SASA < 5.0 Å2), moderately buried (5.0-15 .0 Å2), or significantly exposed (> 15 .0 Å2). These thresholds were chosen to provide the LLM agent with an interpretable summary that correlates with binding-site occupancy: highly buried ligands typically fill a well-defined pocket, moderately buried ones occupy a partial pocket with solvent-exposed substituents, and significantly exposed ligands are likely surface-adsorbed artefacts. The burial ratio additionally serves as the input for the downstream binding mode classification tool (Section 3.2.7), which assigns each pose to one of three binding modes ( deep_pocket , partial_pocket , or surface ) based on defined burial-ratio thresholds. This two-stage design separates the quantitative SASA calculation from the categorical interpretation, allowing the agent to reason over both raw numbers and high-level classifications when comparing poses. 

3.2.3 Conformational Strain Analysis 

We quantify the energetic penalty associated with the bound-state ligand conformation by comparing its molecular mechanics energy to that of a force-field-optimised reference conformation. Conformational strain is a well-established indicator of pose quality: productive binding modes typically exhibit moderate conformational strain offset by favorable protein-ligand interactions, whereas docking artefacts often show excessive strain without compensatory binding contacts [11]. The calculation is implemented using the MMFF94 force field [ 44 ] as provided in RDKit [ 36 , 45 ] and operates on the raw pose file rather than on the protein-ligand complex, as detailed in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1: Conformational Strain Energy Calculation 

Input: Bound-state ligand conformation Mpose 

Output: Strain energy ∆Estrain (kcal/mol), structural deviation RMSD (Å) 

Mref ← Copy (Mpose );Add explicit hydrogens with 3D coordinates to Mpose and Mref if absent; 

if MMFF94 parameterisation succeeds for Mref then 

Minimise Mref with MMFF94 (max 500 iterations); 

else 

Minimise Mref with UFF (max 500 iterations); 

Epose ← ForceFieldEnergy (Mpose );

Eref ← ForceFieldEnergy (Mref );

∆Estrain ← Epose − Eref ;RMSD ← AlignAndMeasure (Mref , M pose );

return ∆Estrain , RMSD ;The strain energy ∆Estrain = Epose − Eref is computed in kcal/mol, where a positive value indicates that the bound conformation is higher in energy than the relaxed reference, with the magnitude reflecting the thermodynamic cost of adopting the bound-state geometry. The RMSD complements the energetic metric by revealing whether the strain arises from localised distortions (low RMSD despite non-negligible strain) or from large-scale conformational rearrangements (high RMSD). 10 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses The strain energy is mapped to one of five qualitative categories to provide the LLM agent with an interpretable summary: 

excellent (∆Estrain < 1 kcal/mol), good (1-3 kcal/mol), acceptable (3-6 kcal/mol), concerning (6-10 kcal/mol), or 

poor (> 10 kcal/mol, likely indicative of a docking artefact). Analogously, the RMSD is classified as minimal structural deviation (< 0.5 Å), small structural changes (0.5-1.0 Å), moderate conformational changes (1.0-2.0 Å), or significant conformational rearrangement (> 2.0 Å). If the MMFF94 parameterisation fails for either the bound or reference molecule, typically because the ligand contains atom types outside the force field’s coverage, the tool raises a structured error rather than returning unreliable energies. This fail-safe prevents silent propagation of incorrect strain values into the agent’s decision context. The agent’s system prompt instructs the LLM to interpret strain in combination with other metrics rather than in isolation. In particular, moderate strain ( 3-6 kcal/mol) can be acceptable if offset by a strong interaction network, a principle consistent with the observation that protein-bound ligands frequently adopt conformations above their global minimum in exchange for complementary interactions with the binding site [ 11 ]. Conversely, very low strain alone does not guarantee a productive binding mode if the pose lacks meaningful protein-ligand contacts. 

Caveat on absolute strain magnitudes. The reader will encounter raw ∆Estrain values in the range 44 -97 kcal/mol in the representative-system analyses (Section 4.5) and the case-study tables that follow. These absolute magnitudes exceed by roughly an order of magnitude what crystallographic surveys of protein-bound ligands would predict ( ≲ 5 kcal/mol for the majority of complexes) [ 46 ], consistent with known tendencies of MMFF94 to overestimate small-molecule strain [ 44 ] and with the use of a static, unminimised bound-state geometry rather than a restrained complex minimisation. We therefore flag here, before the absolute values are used in downstream analyses, that the raw numbers are not interpretable as physical strain penalties. They enter the pipeline as relative discriminators only: across poses of the same ligand in the same system, ranking differences in ∆Estrain remain informative even when the baseline is inflated, and the agent’s system prompt makes this relative-only interpretation explicit (Section 3.4). Validating the absolute scale, for example by restrained minimisation of the bound-state complex or by substituting a higher-fidelity force field or a quantum-mechanical torsion scan, is deferred to future work (Section 5.8). 

3.2.4 Steric Clash Detection 

We detect van der Waals (vdW) overlaps between ligand and protein atoms as a direct indicator of geometrically implausible docking poses. Poses with numerous or deep steric clashes violate fundamental physical constraints and are almost invariably docking artefacts, making clash count and severity valuable discriminators during multi-criteria ranking. The clash detection algorithm operates on two inputs: (i) the protein-ligand complex PDB file produced during preprocessing (Section 3.1), from which protein atom coordinates are extracted, and (ii) the raw ligand pose file, from which ligand atom coordinates and element types are obtained via RDKit [ 36 ]. Only standard protein residues are included in the analysis; water molecules and metal ions (the only HETATM records retained after preprocessing) are excluded because displaced waters are expected at the binding site and because metal-ligand coordination distances (∼2.0-2.5 Å) fall below the vdW overlap threshold and would generate false-positive clashes. The procedure is formalised in Algorithm 2. The tolerance factor α = 0 .75 follows PoseBusters [ 12 ], which uses the same threshold for its intermolecular clash test, a value at which nearly all experimentally resolved crystal structures pass. This choice accounts for the "softness" of vdW surfaces, so that only contacts representing genuine steric violations, rather than routine close contacts, are flagged. The clash energy E penalises deep penetrations quadratically, while the severity S normalises E by the maximum reasonable overlap for the ligand (corresponding to a 0.5 Å overlap per ligand atom) and clamps the result between 0 and 1. The clash count is mapped to one of five qualitative categories: excellent (0 clashes), good (≤ 2), acceptable (3-5), 

concerning (6-10 ), or poor (> 10 clashes, strongly indicative of a false-positive pose). Additionally, the ten most severe clashes, ranked by overlap magnitude, are reported with their ligand atom index, protein residue identity, and overlap distance, enabling the LLM agent to assess whether clashes occur in the core binding region or in peripheral, flexible segments of the ligand. The agent’s system prompt provides guidelines for interpreting clash information in context. In particular, the agent is instructed to distinguish peripheral clashes (solvent-exposed tails) from clashes near key interaction sites, and to consider the correlation between clashes and conformational strain: a high clash count coupled with high strain is especially problematic, whereas modest clashes with low strain may be resolvable through minor rigid-body adjustment. 11 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Algorithm 2: Steric clash detection between ligand and protein atoms. 

Input :Ligand atom set L = {l1, . . . , l N } with coordinates and element types; Protein atom set P = {p1, . . . , p M } (standard residues only); Tolerance factor α = 0 .75 

Output : Clash count C, clash energy E, clash severity S, clashing pairs K

foreach atom a ∈ L ∪ P do 

ra 

> vdW

← tabulated vdW radius for element of a

if element not parameterised then ra 

> vdW

← 1.7 Å

end 

D ← pairwise distance matrix between L and PK ← ∅ 

for i ← 1 to N do for j ← 1 to M do 

dthresh ← α ·  rli 

> vdW

+ rpj

> vdW



if Dij < d thresh then 

δ ← dthresh − Dij 

K ← K ∪ { (i, j, δ )}

end end end 

C ← |K| 

E ← X 

> (i,j,δ )∈ K

δ2

S ← min  1, E / (N × 0.25) 

return C, E, S, K

3.2.5 Unsatisfied Polar Atom Penalty 

When a polar atom on the ligand is buried inside the protein binding site without forming a compensating hydrogen bond or electrostatic contact, the desolvation cost of stripping its hydration shell is not offset, incurring a free-energy penalty estimated at several kcal/mol per unsatisfied group [ 2 ]. The same penalty applies in reverse when the ligand occludes a protein polar atom without forming a compensating contact, but the current implementation evaluates only the ligand side; extending the analysis to protein-side desolvation is left as future work. Even a single such penalty can negate a substantial portion of the binding free energy, making the count of unsatisfied buried polar atoms a sensitive discriminator between productive binding modes and docking artefacts. We quantify this effect by combining SMARTS-based identification of ligand polar atoms with atomic-resolution SASA burial assessment and distance-based proximity checking against protein polar atoms. The algorithm operates on two inputs: (i) the protein-ligand complex PDB file, from which protein polar-atom coordinates and per-atom SASA values are obtained, and (ii) the raw ligand pose file, from which polar atoms are identified via RDKit [ 36 ]. It proceeds in four stages, formalised in Algorithm 3. 

Stage 1: ligand polar-atom identification. Hydrogen-bond acceptor (HBA) atoms are iden-tified by three SMARTS patterns applied to the ligand molecule: (i) nitrogen acceptors 

[N;!$(N-[SX4](=O)(=O));!$(N-C(=O)-O);!$(N=*)] (excluding nitro groups, carbamates, and double-bonded nitrogens), (ii) terminal oxygen atoms [O;D1] (e.g. carbonyls), and (iii) divalent oxygen atoms [O;D2] 

(e.g. ethers and hydroxyls). Hydrogen-bond donor (HBD) atoms are identified by a single SMARTS pattern 

[NX3,NX4,OX2,SX2;!H0] , which matches any nitrogen, oxygen, or sulfur atom bearing at least one explicit or implicit hydrogen. The union of HBA and HBD atom indices constitutes the set of ligand polar atoms A.12 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Stage 2: burial assessment. Per-atom SASA values are computed on the full protein-ligand complex using the Shrake-Rupley algorithm [ 42 ] via BioPython [ 43 ] at atomic resolution ( level="A" ), following the same procedure and residue-exclusion criteria described in Section 3.2.2. A ligand polar atom a ∈ A is classified as buried if its SASA falls below a threshold of τburial = 1 .0 Å2. Atoms whose SASA could not be determined (e.g. due to naming mismatches) are assigned a default SASA of 100.0 Å 2, conservatively treating them as exposed and thus excluding them from the penalty. 

Stage 3: interaction checking. For each buried ligand polar atom, we test whether a compensating interaction with the protein exists by measuring the Euclidean distance to every protein polar atom. The protein polar-atom set P

comprises all backbone nitrogen and oxygen atoms of standard residues plus the following side-chain atoms: Ser O γ,Thr O γ1, Tyr O η, Cys S γ, His N δ1 and N ε2, Lys N ζ, Arg N ε, N η1, and N η2, Asn O δ1 and N δ2, Gln O ε1 and Nε2, Asp O δ1 and O δ2, and Glu O ε1 and O ε2. A buried polar atom is considered satisfied if any protein polar atom lies within dint = 3 .5 Å; otherwise it is marked as unsatisfied . This criterion evaluates direct protein contacts only; satisfaction through a water-mediated hydrogen bond, which PLIP detects as a water bridge (Section 3.2.1), is not accounted for in the current penalty calculation. 

Stage 4: penalty scoring. Each unsatisfied buried polar atom incurs a penalty of 0.5 units. The raw penalty is capped at a maximum of 10.0 to prevent a single severely penalised pose from dominating the multi-criteria comparison. A burial ratio ρ = nunsat /|A| is additionally reported, expressing the fraction of the ligand’s total polar atoms that are both buried and unsatisfied. 

Algorithm 3: Unsatisfied polar atom penalty calculation. 

Input :Ligand polar atom set A (HBA ∪ HBD, identified by SMARTS); Protein polar atom set P (backbone N, O + side-chain polar atoms); Per-atom SASA values from complex; Burial threshold τburial = 1 .0 Å2;Interaction distance dint = 3 .5 Å; Penalty weight w = 0 .5; maximum penalty Pmax = 10 .0

Output : Unsatisfied count nunsat , penalty P , burial ratio ρnunsat ← 0

foreach atom a ∈ A do 

SASA a ← atomic SASA of a in the complex 

if SASA a unavailable then SASA a ← 100 .0

if SASA a < τ burial then 

dmin ← min   

> p∈ P

∥xa − xp∥

if dmin ≥ dint then 

nunsat ← nunsat + 1 

end end end 

P ← min( Pmax , n unsat × w)

ρ ← nunsat / |A| 

return nunsat , P, ρ 

The penalty score is mapped to one of five qualitative categories: excellent (P = 0 ), good (P ≤ 1.0), acceptable 

(1.0 < P ≤ 2.5), concerning (2.5 < P ≤ 5.0), or poor (P > 5.0). In addition to the per-atom classification, the tool reports each unsatisfied atom’s index, element type, and SASA value, allowing the LLM agent to assess whether a penalty arises from deeply buried pharmacophoric groups (more severe) or from marginally buried, solvent-accessible atoms (potentially less consequential). 13 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses The agent’s system prompt instructs the LLM to weigh polar penalties in concert with other metrics. Buried unsatisfied 

charged groups (e.g. amines, carboxylates) carry a higher implicit desolvation cost than neutral polar atoms, and the agent is directed to flag such cases as especially problematic. Conversely, a moderate penalty score may be acceptable if the corresponding atoms lie at the pocket periphery and the pose otherwise exhibits strong interaction quality and low conformational strain. 

3.2.6 SMILES Extraction 

The sixth primary tool extracts a canonical isomeric SMILES string for each ligand pose using RDKit [ 36 ]. Unlike the five preceding tools, SMILES extraction does not produce a ranking metric; it serves as a chemical-identity check that determines whether the poses under comparison are conformers of the same molecule or distinct ligands. All ten benchmark systems in this study involve a single ligand docked in multiple conformations, so the SMILES check reduces to a no-op diversity verification and the SMILES block is omitted from every anonymised analysis file passed to the LLM; the multi-ligand code path is an architectural provision that becomes active only in use cases such as virtual-screening hit-list triage. Algorithmic detail (canonicalisation settings, hydrogen handling, and the diversity-check logic) is provided in Supplementary Section A.6. 

3.2.7 Derived Assessment Tools 

The six primary tools described in Sections 3.2.1 to 3.2.6 each probe a single physicochemical property of the protein-ligand complex. Three additional derived tools (Interaction Quality Assessment, Binding Mode Classification, and Ligand Efficiency Assessment), described in the remainder of this section, are executed sequentially after all primary analyses have completed. Rather than re-running molecular simulations, each derived tool reads the structured analysis files already written by the primary tools and computes higher-level metrics that integrate information across multiple properties. This design avoids redundant computation while enabling the agent to reason about composite quantities such as the geometric quality of a hydrogen bond or the number of interactions per heavy atom. The three derived tools are executed in a fixed order: interaction quality first, binding mode classification second, and ligand efficiency last. This ordering is deliberate: the ligand efficiency tool requires the total quality score produced by the interaction quality tool, so the latter must complete first. All derived metrics are appended to the corresponding analysis files before the final anonymisation and presentation to the LLM agent. 

Interaction Quality Assessment. The PLIP tool (Section 3.2.1) reports the count and geometric parameters of detected protein-ligand interactions, but it does not distinguish a strong, near-ideal hydrogen bond from a marginal one that barely satisfies the detection threshold. The Interaction Quality Assessment tool closes this gap by assigning a continuous quality score from 0 to 1 to every individual interaction based on its geometric optimality, and then aggregating these scores into a total quality metric for the pose. Three interaction types are scored: hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts, and salt bridges. 

Hydrogen-bond quality. Hydrogen-bond geometry is evaluated along two dimensions: heavy-atom donor-acceptor distance d and donor-hydrogen-acceptor angle θ. Each dimension is mapped to a score sd and sθ , respectively, via piecewise-constant functions informed by crystallographic statistics of hydrogen bonds in organic and protein crystals [47, 48]: 

sd =



1.0 if d ≤ 3.0 Å,

0.9 if 3.0 < d ≤ 3.2 Å,

0.6 if 3.2 < d ≤ 3.5 Å,

0.3 if 3.5 < d ≤ 3.8 Å,

0.1 otherwise ,

(1) 

sθ =



1.0 if θ ≥ 150 ◦,

0.9 if 140 ◦ ≤ θ < 150 ◦,

0.7 if 130 ◦ ≤ θ < 140 ◦,

0.5 if 120 ◦ ≤ θ < 130 ◦,

0.3 if 110 ◦ ≤ θ < 120 ◦,

0.1 otherwise .

(2) 14 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses Both functions assign a floor of 0.1 rather than zero because they are applied exclusively to interactions that PLIP has already detected as hydrogen bonds using its own, broader geometric thresholds. A contact that passes PLIP’s detection criteria but falls outside the quality scorer’s optimal ranges still receives a small positive contribution to Q, preserving consistency with the interaction count ntotal (which includes every PLIP-detected contact regardless of geometry). The combined score for a single hydrogen bond is the geometric mean of the two components: 

qhb = √sd · sθ . (3) The geometric mean is preferred over the arithmetic mean because it is more sensitive to imbalances: a hydrogen bond with an excellent distance but a poor angle (or vice versa) receives a lower score than one with moderate values in both dimensions. To facilitate the agent’s qualitative reasoning, each hydrogen bond is additionally labelled as excellent 

(qhb ≥ 0.9), good (0.7 ≤ qhb < 0.9), acceptable (0.5 ≤ qhb < 0.7), weak (0.3 ≤ qhb < 0.5), or poor (qhb < 0.3). 

Hydrophobic contact quality. The quality of a hydrophobic contact depends primarily on the distance between the interacting non-polar atoms, with shorter contacts indicating tighter non-polar packing and correspondingly stronger van der Waals attraction [2]. The distance-based score is: 

qhp =



1.0 if d ≤ 3.5 Å,

0.85 if 3.5 < d ≤ 3.8 Å,

0.7 if 3.8 < d ≤ 4.0 Å,

0.5 if 4.0 < d ≤ 4.3 Å,

0.3 if 4.3 < d ≤ 4.5 Å,

0.15 otherwise .

(4) Contacts scoring qhp ≥ 0.85 are labelled strong , those with 0.3 ≤ qhp < 0.85 as moderate , and the remainder as weak .

Salt-bridge quality. Salt bridges are scored by the distance between the centres of the interacting charged groups, informed by established distance criteria for ion pairs in proteins [49]: 

qsb =



1.0 if d ≤ 3.5 Å,

0.8 if 3.5 < d ≤ 4.0 Å,

0.5 if 4.0 < d ≤ 4.5 Å,

0.3 if 4.5 < d ≤ 5.0 Å,

0.1 otherwise .

(5) Salt bridges scoring qsb ≥ 0.8 are classified as strong , those with 0.3 ≤ qsb < 0.8 as moderate , and the rest as weak .

Aggregation. The total quality score for a pose is the sum of all individual interaction quality scores: 

Q =

> nhb

X

> i=1

qhb ,i +

> nhp

X

> j=1

qhp ,j +

> nsb

X

> k=1

qsb ,k . (6) Unlike the individual scores, Q is not normalised to 0 to 1 and grows with the number of interactions. This is intentional: a pose forming many geometrically favourable interactions should receive a higher composite score than one forming only a few. Because all poses within a single ranking call represent conformations of the same compound, they share the same heavy-atom count; Q differences between poses therefore reflect genuine differences in interaction networks, not molecular size. When molecules of different sizes must be compared, the quality efficiency QE = Q/N HA 

(Section 3.2.7) provides the size-normalised counterpart. The agent’s system prompt provides interpretive guidance: 

Q > 10 indicates high overall quality, 5 ≤ Q ≤ 10 moderate quality, and Q < 5 low quality. Per-type averages and counts of excellent, good, and poor interactions are also reported, enabling the agent to identify, for example, a pose with many interactions of which the majority are geometrically poor. 15 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Binding Mode Classification. The SASA-based burial ratio computed in Section 3.2.2 quantifies how much of the ligand’s surface area is shielded from solvent in the bound state (by the protein and, to a lesser extent, by intramolecular self-occlusion), but it does not directly answer the pharmacologically relevant question of where the ligand sits in relation to the protein surface. The Binding Mode Classification tool maps the burial ratio and the average per-atom SASA to one of three discrete binding modes, each associated with a confidence score and a quality estimate: • DEEP_POCKET. The ligand is substantially enclosed within the protein interior. Two threshold pairs can trigger this classification, evaluated in order of decreasing stringency: the strict pair ( ρb ≥ 70% and 

¯s < 2.0 Å2) is tested first and yields a confidence score between 0.70 and 0.95; if it fails, the relaxed pair (ρb ≥ 60% and ¯s < 3.0 Å2) is tested and yields a confidence between 0.60 and 0.85. Deep-pocket binding is characteristic of well-docked poses and carries the highest quality scores. • PARTIAL_POCKET. The ligand is partially enclosed by the protein. Again, two threshold pairs are tested in order: the dual-criteria condition ( ρb ≥ 50% and ¯s < 4.0 Å2, confidence 0.60) is evaluated first; if it fails, a burial-ratio-only fallback ( ρb ≥ 40% , confidence 0.50) applies. Partial binding may reflect an extended binding site or a ligand that protrudes from the pocket; the quality score decreases as either metric deteriorates. • SURFACE. The ligand lies predominantly on the protein surface with minimal burial. This mode is assigned when ρb < 40% . Surface binding almost always indicates a docking artefact, and the classification carries the lowest quality score. The dual-criteria design, requiring both a burial ratio threshold and a per-atom SASA constraint for the higher-quality modes, prevents misclassification of large ligands that achieve a high nominal burial ratio while still presenting substantial solvent-exposed surface area per atom. A fourth label, UNCERTAIN, is assigned when the required SASA data are unavailable. The agent’s system prompt instructs the LLM to treat binding mode as a strong discriminator: surface-bound poses should never rank first regardless of their interaction counts, because a high number of interactions on the protein surface almost certainly reflects non-specific contacts rather than genuine binding. This rule assumes the target has a well-defined binding pocket; for targets with shallow grooves, solvent-exposed allosteric sites, or protein-protein interaction hotspots, surface binding can be the legitimate mode, and the directive would penalise the correct pose (Section 5.7). Conversely, a deep-pocket classification reinforces the plausibility of a pose and lends additional weight to its interaction profile and complementarity metrics. 

Ligand Efficiency Assessment. Larger ligands tend to form more interactions simply by virtue of having more atoms, which can bias naive ranking schemes toward bulkier molecules or toward poses that happen to extend into secondary sites. The Ligand Efficiency Assessment tool corrects for this size effect by normalising interaction counts and quality scores by the number of heavy (non-hydrogen) atoms NHA , inspired by the ligand-efficiency concept introduced by Hopkins et al. [50]. Two efficiency metrics are computed: 

LE = ntotal 

NHA 

, (7) where ntotal is the total number of detected interactions (hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts, and salt bridges); and, when the interaction-quality total Q is available from the preceding tool: 

QE = QNHA 

. (8) The burial ratio ρb (Section 3.2.2) is not normalised by NHA because it is already defined as the fraction of ligand atoms classified as buried and is therefore inherently size-independent. The ligand efficiency LE is mapped to a qualitative rating: excellent (LE ≥ 0.4), good (0.3 ≤ LE < 0.4), acceptable 

(0.2 ≤ LE < 0.3), or poor (LE < 0.2). A per-type breakdown is additionally reported, expressing the number of hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts, and salt bridges per heavy atom. This breakdown helps the agent distinguish, for example, two poses with identical LE values where one achieves its efficiency through many weak hydrophobic contacts and the other through a smaller number of geometrically strong hydrogen bonds. The agent is instructed to use ligand efficiency as a tie-breaking criterion: when two poses exhibit similar raw interaction counts and quality scores, the pose with the higher LE is preferred, as it achieves comparable recognition with fewer 16 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses atomic degrees of freedom. Because all ten benchmark systems involve a single ligand, every pose within a given system shares the same NHA ; both LE and QE are therefore rank-equivalent to their unnormalised counterparts ( ntotal 

and Q, respectively) and cannot change the ordering that raw metrics already determine. Size normalisation would become informative only in multi-ligand comparisons where molecules with different heavy-atom counts compete directly. 

3.3 Pose Anonymisation Protocol 

Large language models can exhibit positional bias, a tendency to favour items presented earlier or later in the input context, irrespective of their content [ 29 ]. In a pose-ranking scenario, this bias could manifest as a systematic preference for poses that appear first in the analysis context or whose filenames suggest a lower ordinal number (e.g. pose_01 over 

pose_09 ). Because the docking engine typically assigns pose names in order of decreasing docking score, exposing these names to the LLM would allow it to infer, consciously or implicitly, the scoring-function ranking, defeating the purpose of an independent re-evaluation. We mitigate both positional and naming bias through a deterministic anonymisation protocol with three stages. First, each pose is assigned an eight-character alphanumeric code by hashing the concatenation of the system identifier and pose name: 

code( s, p ) = Base36  SHA -256( s ∥ p) [0:8]  , (9) where s is the system identifier, p the pose name, and ∥ denotes string concatenation. SHA-256’s avalanche property ensures that consecutively numbered poses produce codes with no discernible pattern. Second, all tool outputs are passed through a sanitisation step that replaces every occurrence of the original pose name with the anonymous code, preventing identity leakage into the LLM’s context. Third, after inference, a de-anonymisation step maps the codes back to the original pose names for human-readable reporting. Design rationale, implementation details, and context-presentation rules are provided in Supplementary Section A.2. 

3.4 Agent Architecture 

The analysis tools described in Sections 3.2.1-3.2.7 produce a rich but heterogeneous body of evidence for every pose: geometric interaction parameters, burial statistics, strain energies, clash counts, polar penalties, quality scores, binding-mode classifications, and ligand-efficiency metrics. Translating this multi-dimensional evidence into a single, justified ranking is the responsibility of an LLM-based reasoning agent whose architecture is described in this section. 

Model and orchestration. We employ OpenAI’s GPT-5 as the reasoning backbone, accessed through the OpenAI Agents SDK (version 0.5.0). The SDK provides a lightweight abstraction over the model API that supports structured agent definitions, comprising a name, a model identifier, model-level settings, and a system prompt loaded from an external file, together with a streaming execution runner that returns both the final answer and the chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning trace as separate outputs. Three model-level parameters govern the reasoning behaviour: (i) reasoning effort is set to "high" , instructing the model to allocate extended internal computation before committing to an answer; (ii) the reasoning summary mode is set to "detailed" , requesting a verbose CoT trace that exposes the model’s intermediate comparisons and trade-offs; and (iii) model verbosity is set to "high" , encouraging exhaustive metric-by-metric discussion rather than terse conclusions. These settings are chosen to maximise the transparency and auditability of the ranking decision at the cost of higher token usage and latency. Inference is executed via the SDK’s streaming runner, which yields response events incrementally. Two event types are processed: text-delta events, which deliver fragments of the structured final answer, and reasoning-item events, which expose the model’s internal reasoning summary once inference completes. Both streams are accumulated, de-anonymised (Section 3.3), and persisted to a comprehensive analysis log that records the full system prompt, the anonymised input context, the raw CoT reasoning, and the final ranking. 

System prompt architecture. The agent’s behaviour is governed by a domain-specific system prompt of approxi-mately 7 800 words, maintained as a standalone Markdown file and loaded at runtime. The prompt is organised into seven major sections, each encoding a distinct aspect of the agent’s role: 1. Anonymous code integrity (∼500 words). Rules for handling the eight-character pose identifiers introduced by the anonymisation protocol (Section 3.3): character-for-character copying, case sensitivity, mandatory cross-checking against analysis-file headers, and worked examples of correct versus incorrect usage. These instructions prevent transcription errors that would break the automatic de-anonymisation step. 17 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 2. Analysis data documentation (∼4 200 words). A tool-by-tool reference describing the algorithm, output format, key metrics, interpretation thresholds, and common pitfalls for each of the nine computational tools. For every tool, the section mirrors the information that a domain expert would need to interpret the raw output: threshold values that delineate quality categories (e.g. "excellent" versus "poor" strain), caveats about metric reliability (e.g. why a high interaction count on a surface-bound pose is misleading), and guidance on when a given metric should override or yield to another. 3. Evaluation criteria (∼200 words). Four general principles, consistency over absolute values, multi-metric cor-roboration, penalty saturation with diminishing returns, and physicochemical plausibility as a hard constraint, that frame the agent’s overall evaluation philosophy. 4. Hierarchical decision framework (∼1 800 words). The core ranking logic, described below. 5. Reasoning process (∼400 words). Step-by-step instructions for systematic analysis: initial outlier scan, identification of key differentiators, iterative comparison with backtracking to source data, and mandatory identity verification at every step to prevent pose-label confusion. 6. Output format (∼500 words). A template specifying five required output sections (see below) with worked examples illustrating the expected level of metric-by-metric detail, explicit weighting rationale, and uncertainty disclosure. 7. Reminders (∼200 words). Closing instructions on scientific judgment, honesty about limitations, pose-identity consistency, and optional suggestions for future extensions (e.g. explicit water-network modelling, per-residue energy decomposition). 

Hierarchical decision framework. Rather than combining all metrics into a single composite score, the system prompt encodes a priority-ordered decision hierarchy that the agent is instructed to apply when evaluating and comparing poses. The hierarchy has four levels: 1. Binding mode (highest priority). Surface-bound poses (burial ratio < 40% ) are eliminated from top-tier consideration regardless of other metrics. A high interaction count on a surface-bound pose is explicitly flagged as an artefact of non-specific contacts rather than evidence of productive binding. 2. Interaction quality. Among poses that pass the binding-mode filter, the agent evaluates the geometry-based quality of each interaction (Section 3.2.7) rather than the raw count. A worked example in the system prompt illustrates the arithmetic consequence of the Q aggregation: three hydrogen bonds with an average quality of 0.85 yield Q = 2 .55 , whereas five hydrogen bonds averaging 0.45 yield only Q = 2 .25 . The example is not an externally imposed rule but a direct consequence of the scoring function defined in Equations 3-6, which weights geometric optimality so that a smaller number of near-ideal contacts can outweigh a larger number of marginal ones. 3. Interaction quantity. Additional interactions improve the ranking only if quality is maintained. The agent is instructed to compute quality-per-interaction ratios and to prefer poses with fewer but geometrically superior contacts over those with many marginal ones. 4. Tiebreaker metrics. Conformational strain, steric clashes, unsatisfied polar penalties, and ligand efficiency serve as tiebreakers when the preceding levels do not clearly separate candidates. Strain ( > 15 kcal/mol) is flagged as a tiebreaker penalty: among poses with comparable interaction networks, the one with lower strain is preferred, consistent with the thermodynamic rationale that conformational distortion reduces net binding affinity. A dedicated anti-bias section ( ∼600 words) within the decision framework addresses the "more interactions = better" failure mode that was identified during early development. The section presents a concrete failure example (a surface-bound pose with 10 interactions ranked above a deep-pocket pose with 6 higher-quality interactions), states four principles for avoiding the bias, and provides a decision-making checklist that the agent is expected to internalise: (1) check binding mode before evaluating counts; (2) assess interaction quality, not just quantity; (3) never accept a pose solely because it has the most interactions; (4) surface binders should never rank first. A worked example demonstrates the expected reasoning pattern when quality and quantity disagree. 

Handling conflicting signals. The system prompt provides guidance for four categories of metric conflict: (i) interaction-rich but strained poses, which are flagged as potential over-optimised artefacts; (ii) flat metric landscapes, where many poses have similar scores and the agent should report low confidence rather than over-interpret small numerical differences; (iii) single-metric outliers, which warrant balanced interpretation rather than decisive promotion or demotion; and (iv) cumulative weak signals, where the combination of multiple moderate deficiencies (e.g. weak 18 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses interactions plus moderate strain plus poor burial) is treated as more problematic than any single issue in isolation. Additionally, the prompt encodes a two-step burial assessment protocol that combines absolute thresholds with relative ranking. Absolute thresholds serve as hard filters: poses with burial below 20% are classified as surface-bound artefacts and penalised regardless of other metrics, while poses above 80% receive strong priority as deeply pocket-engaged. For poses in the intermediate range (20-80% burial), a percentile-based ranking is applied: poses are sorted by burial ratio and divided into top, middle, and bottom tiers relative to the current pose set. This hybrid strategy is necessary because acceptable burial levels vary between protein systems, a shallow binding groove may never produce burial ratios above 70%, whereas a deep enclosed pocket routinely exceeds 90%, so purely absolute thresholds would systematically misclassify poses in atypical systems, while purely relative ranking would fail to detect runs in which all poses are surface-bound. 

Reasoning process. The agent is instructed to work iteratively rather than streaming a single-pass analysis. The prescribed reasoning workflow begins with an initial scan for obvious outliers (severe clashes, minimal interactions, extreme penalties), proceeds to identification of key differentiators, then enters a deep-dive comparison phase for closely ranked poses, and concludes with a verification step that cross-checks all conclusions against the original analysis-file data. A mandatory identity-verification rule requires the agent to confirm the exact pose identifier (anonymous code) at every step of the reasoning, re-opening the relevant analysis-file section if any ambiguity is detected. For large input contexts, the agent is permitted to construct intermediate summaries, but it must perform a final verification pass against the source data to guard against summarisation-induced errors. 

Structured output format. The system prompt mandates five output sections, each with a defined purpose: 1. Best Pose Selection. The selected best pose, a comprehensive rationale explaining why it is superior, and a metric-by-metric breakdown that states the value and the weight assigned to each metric (interactions, burial/SASA, conformational strain, steric clashes, polar penalties). A worked example in the system prompt demonstrates the expected granularity, including statements such as "interaction quality (30%), binding mode (25%), burial (20%), strain (15%), clashes (5%), polar penalties (5%)". 2. Comparative Analysis. A brief explanation of why the two to three runner-up poses were not selected, with specific reference to the metrics that were decisive. 3. Confidence Assessment. A self-reported confidence level (high, medium, or low) accompanied by factors supporting or undermining confidence, and a list of uncertainties or additional data that could strengthen the decision. 4. Key Findings. Observations about the overall quality of the pose set, common patterns (shared strengths or weaknesses), and any systematic docking issues identified across multiple poses. 5. Recommendations. Suggestions for refining the selected pose (e.g. local minimisation, side-chain repacking) and identification of alternative poses worth considering as backup candidates. This structured format was designed to balance two needs: (a) giving domain experts enough detail to audit, agree with, or override the agent’s decision, and (b) constraining the model’s output to prevent rambling or omission of critical justification. The confidence-assessment section, in particular, addresses a limitation common to LLM-based systems: the tendency to present conclusions with false certainty [ 51 ]. By requiring the agent to enumerate its uncertainties, the prompt encourages calibrated rather than overconfident outputs. 

Context assembly and input construction. Before inference, the anonymised analysis files, one per pose, are loaded, and each file’s content is introduced to the model under its anonymous code (e.g. "Analysis file for pose: K7M9N2P4"). A preamble precedes the concatenated analysis data, explicitly stating that pose identifiers are randomised and that ranking must be based solely on the computational metrics. The assembled context, together with the system prompt, constitutes the full input to a single inference call; no multi-turn retrieval or tool-use loop is required during reasoning, because all relevant evidence has been pre-computed and embedded in the prompt. The framework additionally supports follow-up queries through a conversation-history mechanism. After the initial ranking, users may pose clarifying questions (e.g. "Why was pose X ranked below pose Y despite having more interactions?"). In this mode, the full analysis context is re-included alongside the conversation history to ensure that the agent retains access to the source data when formulating its response, rather than relying on potentially lossy internal summaries of earlier turns. 19 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

3.5 User Interface 

AgenticPosesRanker is deployed as a web application built with the Streamlit framework [ 37 ], offering an interactive graphical interface that exposes the full analysis pipeline without requiring command-line expertise (Supplementary Figure S1). The interface is designed around three principles: (i) minimal configuration, users supply only a protein structure, a set of docked poses, and an API key; (ii) transparency, every stage of the analysis is visible as it executes; and (iii) interactivity, after the initial ranking, users can ask follow-up questions through a conversational chat, and the agent retains full access to the analysis data when formulating its responses. The application is also available as a command-line interface (CLI) for batch processing and scriptable workflows. Implementation details, including the configuration workflow, two-column layout, progress feedback mechanism, follow-up conversation design, and error-handling strategy, are described in Supplementary Section A.3. 

3.6 Benchmark Construction 3.6.1 Source Dataset 

We derive our benchmark from PDBbind 2016 [ 32 , 33 ], a curated database of protein-ligand complexes for which both crystal structures and experimentally determined binding affinities are available. PDBbind applies quality filters including unambiguous binding data and binary (single-protein, single-ligand) complex topology, making it a widely adopted reference for scoring-function development and evaluation. The 2016 release comprises 11,259 system directories, each containing the protein structure (PDB format), the co-crystallised ligand (SDF format), and associated binding-affinity annotations. 

Docked poses. The docked poses used in this work were not generated by us; they were obtained from the cross-docked dataset assembled by Francoeur et al. [ 16 ] to train the Gnina 1.0 molecular docking program [ 15 ]. In that dataset, each system was docked with Smina [ 5], a fork of AutoDock Vina [ 1]. Each docking run produced multiple candidate poses with per-pose energy estimates ( minimizedAffinity scores); file format and directory structure details are given in Supplementary Section A.4. 

Native pose generation. To enable atom-by-atom RMSD comparison between docked poses and the crystallographic binding mode, we regenerated a native pose for each system by passing the co-crystallised ligand through Smina in scoring-only mode, producing an output file with the same atom ordering and hydrogen convention as the docked conformations. The full procedure is described in Supplementary Section A.4. 

3.6.2 Pose Classification 

Each docked pose was classified according to its structural deviation from the crystallographic binding mode. We quantified deviation as the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) between the heavy atoms of the docked pose and the corresponding native pose generated by Smina (Section 3.6.1). RMSD values were computed with spyrmsd [ 10 ], a Python library that accounts for molecular symmetry through graph isomorphism-based atom matching; computational details are given in Supplementary Section A.5. Based on the computed RMSD, each pose was assigned to one of three categories: • Binder (class 0): RMSD < 2.0 Å, the pose closely reproduces the crystallographic binding mode. • Ambiguous (class 1): 2.0 ≤ RMSD ≤ 4.0 Å, intermediate deviation that precludes confident assignment. • Non-binder (class 2): RMSD > 4.0 Å, the pose departs substantially from the native geometry. The 2.0 Å threshold for near-native poses follows the convention widely adopted in molecular docking benchmarks [ 4 ]. The intermediate category (2.0-4.0 Å) serves as a buffer zone between binders and non-binders. Only systems containing at least one binder (RMSD < 2.0 Å) qualified for the scoring-function evaluation (Section 3.6.3), and only binder poses were eligible to serve as the ground-truth reference (Section 3.7.1). Ambiguous poses remain in the candidate pools presented to the agent and may compete for selection, but they do not define the evaluation target. Before RMSD calculation, the number of heavy atoms in each docked pose was verified against the native structure to confirm molecular identity. An all-or-nothing policy was enforced: if any individual pose within a system could not be processed, due to file corruption, atom-count mismatch, or RMSD calculation failure, the entire system was discarded rather than producing incomplete classification data. Classification results for each system were stored as a comma-separated file containing the pose index, RMSD value, and assigned class. 20 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

3.6.3 Identification of Scoring Function Failures 

A scoring function failure occurs when the pose closest to the crystallographic binding mode, i.e. the pose with the lowest RMSD to the native structure, does not receive the most favourable (most negative) minimizedAffinity score from Smina. In such cases, the scoring function would direct a practitioner toward a geometrically inferior pose, making these systems precisely the scenarios in which physics-based evaluation beyond the docking score is most needed. Identifying scoring-function failures is therefore central to defining our benchmark: they constitute the primary evaluation target for the agentic ranking pipeline. For each system that passed the pose classification step (Section 3.6.2) and contained at least one near-native pose (RMSD < 2.0 Å), we extracted the minimizedAffinity property stored in the Smina-produced docked SDF file for every pose using RDKit [36]. Two quantities were then compared: 1. the index of the pose with the lowest RMSD to the native structure (the best-RMSD pose ), and 2. the index of the pose with the most negative minimizedAffinity score (the best-scored pose ). If the two indices coincided, Smina was considered to have succeeded : its scoring function assigned the best energy to the near-native pose. If they differed, the system was classified as a scoring function failure .Of the 11,257 systems for which pose classifications were available, 8,597 contained at least one near-native pose and were therefore eligible for scoring-function evaluation. Among these, Smina correctly identified the near-native pose as the top-ranked candidate in 4,350 systems (50.6%), while 4,247 systems (49.4%) exhibited scoring-function failures. The near-parity between successes and failures underscores that empirical scoring functions, despite their efficiency, misrank the best-RMSD pose in roughly half of all cases, a finding consistent with the broader literature on the limitations of knowledge-based and empirical docking scores [4]. This binary partitioning of the dataset into Smina-success and Smina-failure systems provides the foundation for the benchmark design described in Section 3.6.4: the final evaluation set is drawn from both partitions so that the agentic pipeline can be assessed on cases where the conventional score already identifies the correct pose (controls) as well as on cases where it does not (target systems). 

3.6.4 Final System Selection 

From the 8,597 systems eligible for scoring-function evaluation (Section 3.6.3), we selected a compact benchmark of ten protein-ligand complexes, five in which Smina correctly identifies the near-native pose as the top-ranked candidate (success controls) and five in which it does not ( failure targets). This balanced design enables a direct comparison of the agentic pipeline’s behaviour on systems where the conventional scoring function already succeeds (testing whether the agent preserves a correct answer) versus systems where it fails (testing whether the agent can recover the correct pose through multi-criteria reasoning). 

Protein metadata retrieval. To guide diversification, we retrieved protein names and functional classifica-tions for all candidate systems via the RCSB PDB REST API. For each system, the polymer entity end-point ( /rest/v1/core/polymer_entity/{id}/1 ) provided the protein description, and the entry endpoint (/rest/v1/core/entry/{id} ) provided the pdbx_keywords classification, which we adopted as the protein family label. 

Selection criteria. Three objectives governed system selection: 1. Protein family diversity. The ten systems were chosen to span as many distinct protein families as possible, reducing the risk that benchmark performance reflects family-specific biases rather than generalisable ranking ability. The final set covers five families: hydrolase, nuclear receptor, transferase, lyase, and isomerase. 2. Failure severity diversity. Among the five Smina-failure systems, we required a range of scoring displace-ments, from near-misses where the near-native pose is ranked second or third by affinity, through moderate displacements (ranked seventh), to severe failures where the near-native pose falls to the 19th or 20th position. This gradient tests whether the agent can recover the correct pose regardless of how deeply the scoring function has buried it. 3. Structural quality. All systems originate from the PDBbind 2016 dataset (Section 3.6.1), and every system passed the pose classification pipeline (Section 3.6.2), ensuring that its docked poses include at least one near-native conformation (RMSD < 2.0 Å) so that a ground-truth best pose exists. 21 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Selection procedure. The selection was implemented in a four-stage automated pipeline. Starting from a manually curated seed list of twelve pharmacologically notable protein-ligand systems, the pipeline cross-referenced each system against the Smina scoring analysis, partitioned the matches into successes and failures, and then expanded each partition to exactly five systems by drawing additional candidates from the full PDBbind pool. Additional success systems were chosen to maximise protein family diversity relative to the systems already selected. Additional failure systems were stratified by scoring displacement severity, close (affinity rank 2-3), medium (rank 7-11), and severe (rank 18+), and, within each stratum, the system with the most distinct protein family was preferred. The resulting ten systems are summarised in Table 1.                                                                   

> PDB ID Protein Family Smina Poses Best-pose RMSD (Å) Affinity rank
> Smina-success systems (controls)
> 185L T4 lysozyme Hydrolase ✓90.43 11ERR Estrogen receptor Nuclear receptor ✓90.82 12HYY Tyrosine-protein kinase ABL1 Transferase ✓50.85 12P16 Coagulation factor Xa Hydrolase ✓20 1.24 13HS4 Carbonic anhydrase 2 Lyase ✓20 0.96 1
> Smina-failure systems (targets)
> 3OXC HIV-1 protease Hydrolase ×19 0.63 24JFL Peptidyl-prolyl isomerase FKBP5 Isomerase ×20 1.76 34MLT Carbonic anhydrase 2 Lyase ×20 1.16 72HA6 Acetylcholinesterase Hydrolase ×20 1.89 19 4ZLS HIV-1 protease Hydrolase ×20 1.97 20

Table 1: The ten protein-ligand systems selected for benchmark evaluation. Systems are grouped by Smina scoring outcome (success or failure). Poses is the number of docked conformations retained after curation. Best-pose RMSD is the heavy-atom symmetry-corrected RMSD (Å) of the near-native pose closest to the crystallographic binding mode. 

Affinity rank is the 1-based position of that near-native pose when all poses are sorted by Smina minimizedAffinity 

(most negative first); a rank of 1 indicates that Smina correctly assigned the best score to the near-native pose. The five failure systems span a range of scoring displacements from near-miss (rank 2) to severe (rank 20), testing the agent’s ability to recover the correct pose at varying levels of scoring-function error. The five protein families represented, hydrolase, nuclear receptor, transferase, lyase, and isomerase, ensure structural and functional diversity within the benchmark. The ten systems collectively contain 162 docked poses (range: 5-20 per system). Among the five success controls, the near-native pose RMSD ranges from 0.43 to 1.24 Å, confirming that Smina’s best-scored pose is indeed geometrically close to the crystal structure. Among the five failure targets, near-native RMSDs range from 0.63 to 1.97 Å, all well within the 2.0 Å binder threshold, yet Smina ranks these poses between 2nd and 20th by affinity score, demonstrating that the scoring failure is not caused by ambiguous or borderline RMSD values but by a genuine inability of the empirical scoring function to assign the best energy to a clearly near-native conformation. 

3.7 Evaluation Metrics 

We frame the evaluation as a best-pose identification task: given a set of Ni docked poses for system i, the agent must select the single pose that most closely reproduces the crystallographic binding mode. This formulation directly tests whether the agentic pipeline can recover the biologically relevant conformation from among the docking engine’s candidates, the core capability required for practical use in structure-based drug design. Beyond measuring identification accuracy, we additionally analyse the agent’s decision-making process to assess whether its self-reported reasoning faithfully reflects the underlying metric evidence (Section 3.7.7). 

3.7.1 Ground-Truth Definition 

For each of the ten benchmark systems (Section 3.6.4), the ground-truth best pose is defined as the docked conforma-tion with the lowest heavy-atom symmetry-corrected RMSD to the native structure, as determined during the pose classification step (Section 3.6.2). Formally, for a system with Ni candidate poses {p1, . . . , p Ni }, the ground-truth pose index is 

gi = arg min  

> j∈{ 1,...,N i}

RMSD( pj , p native ) , (10) 22 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses where pnative is the crystallographic ligand conformation re-processed through Smina in scoring-only mode to ensure consistent atom ordering (Section 3.6.1). All ten ground-truth poses satisfy the 2.0 Å near-native threshold established in Section 3.6.2, with RMSDs ranging from 0.43 to 1.97 Å (Table 1). Four of the ten systems contain additional poses below this threshold (two systems with two near-native poses each and two with three), but only the single lowest-RMSD pose per system serves as the ground truth. The RMSD deviation metric (Section 3.7.3) distinguishes cases where the agent selects one of these secondary near-native conformations from cases where it selects a geometrically distant pose. 

Native pose exclusion. The evaluation is performed in a without-native configuration: the candidate pool presented to the agent consists exclusively of the Smina-generated docked poses. The native crystallographic conformation is not 

included among the candidates, ensuring that the task tests the agent’s ability to discriminate among computationally generated geometries rather than to trivially recognise an experimentally determined structure. The native pose is used solely for RMSD-based ground-truth assignment and is never exposed to the agent during analysis. 

3.7.2 Best-Pose Identification Accuracy 

The primary evaluation metric is the best-pose identification accuracy (top-1 accuracy): the fraction of benchmark systems for which the agent selects the ground-truth best pose as its top-ranked candidate [ 8]. For m systems, the accuracy is 

Acc = 1

m

> m

X

> i=1

1ˆgi = gi

 , (11) where ˆgi is the pose index selected by the agent for system i, gi is the ground-truth best pose index (Equation 10), and 

1[·] is the indicator function, which returns 1 when the agent’s top-ranked pose is the lowest-RMSD conformation and 0 otherwise. The accuracy is therefore the fraction of systems for which the agent identifies the correct pose. This binary, per-system metric is deliberately strict: the agent receives credit only for identifying the exact correct pose. Alternative metrics that reward "close" selections (e.g. selecting the second-lowest RMSD pose) were considered but rejected, as they would obscure the practically important distinction between selecting and failing to select the near-native conformation. In the four systems that contain more than one near-native pose, this strictness means that selecting a secondary near-native conformation counts as a misidentification, even though the agent recovers a biologically plausible binding mode. The RMSD deviation (Section 3.7.3) captures these near-misses by reporting a small ∆RMSD .Because the accuracy is a proportion estimated from only m = 10 systems, the point estimate alone conveys limited information about the agent’s underlying success probability. We therefore report a 95% Wilson score confidence inter-val [ 35 ], which bounds the range of success probabilities consistent with the observed number of correct identifications under a binomial model. The Wilson interval is preferred over the normal approximation because it provides better coverage for small samples and proportions near 0 or 1 [34]: 

CI 95 = ˆp + z2 

> 2m

± z

q ˆp(1 −ˆp) 

> m

+ z2

> 4m2

1 + z2

> m

, (12) where ˆp = Acc is the observed accuracy and z = 1 .96 for 95% confidence. 

3.7.3 RMSD of Selected Pose 

The top-1 accuracy is a binary metric that does not capture the severity of misidentification. We therefore report a secondary metric: the heavy-atom RMSD of the agent’s selected pose to the native structure. For a correctly identified system, this equals the ground-truth best-pose RMSD; for a misidentified system, it quantifies how far the agent’s choice deviates from the crystallographic binding mode. The RMSD deviation between the selected and ground-truth poses is computed as 

∆RMSD ,i = RMSD(ˆ pi, p native ) − RMSD( pgi , p native ) , (13) where ˆpi is the agent’s selected pose and pgi is the ground-truth best pose. A value of ∆RMSD = 0 indicates a correct identification; positive values indicate how much additional structural deviation the agent’s choice introduces relative to the best available pose. This metric provides practical insight: a misidentification with ∆RMSD = 0 .5 Å is far less 23 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses consequential than one with ∆RMSD = 4 .0 Å, even though both count equally as failures under the binary accuracy metric. 

3.7.4 Baseline Comparisons 

Two baselines contextualise the agent’s performance. 

Smina scoring baseline. Smina’s conventional scoring function provides a natural reference point: for each system, the pose with the most favourable (most negative) minimizedAffinity score is taken as Smina’s top-ranked candidate; when this coincides with the ground-truth best pose, Smina is deemed successful. The ten benchmark systems were selected to include five Smina-success and five Smina-failure cases (Section 3.6.4), yielding a Smina baseline accuracy of 50% by construction. This balanced design ensures that the agent is evaluated on both the "easy" regime (where the scoring function already identifies the correct pose) and the "hard" regime (where it does not), allowing direct comparison of the agentic pipeline’s accuracy against the conventional rescoring baseline on each partition and on the full benchmark. 

Random selection baseline. Under uniformly random selection, the probability of correctly identifying the best pose in a system with Ni candidates is 1/N i. The expected random baseline accuracy across the ten benchmark systems is therefore 

Acc rand = 1

m

> m

X

> i=1

1

Ni

, (14) where Ni ranges from 5 to 20 across the benchmark (Table 1). With m = 10 systems containing a total of 162 poses, this yields an expected random accuracy of approximately 7.7%. The random baseline establishes that any accuracy above this level reflects genuine discriminative ability rather than chance. 

3.7.5 Partition-Stratified Accuracy 

Because the benchmark is balanced by design between five Smina-success and five Smina-failure systems (Section 3.6.4), we additionally report the agent’s accuracy on each partition separately. Let S+ and S− denote the sets of Smina-success and Smina-failure systems, respectively. The partition-stratified accuracies are 

Acc + = 1

|S +|

X

> i∈S +

1ˆgi = gi

 , Acc − = 1

|S −|

X

> i∈S −

1ˆgi = gi

 . (15) 

Acc + measures whether the agent preserves correct identifications that the conventional scoring function already makes, i.e. whether it avoids introducing regressions on "easy" systems. Acc − measures whether the agent can recover the near-native pose on systems where the scoring function fails, which is the primary capability that motivates the agentic approach. The contrast between the two partition accuracies reveals whether any overall improvement is driven by genuine recovery of scoring-function failures or merely by retaining existing successes. Because each partition contains only five systems, the stratified accuracies are reported as descriptive summaries rather than as the basis for formal hypothesis testing; with |S +| = |S −| = 5 , the achievable accuracy values are limited to the set 

{0, 20 , 40 , 60 , 80 , 100 }%, and any associated confidence intervals are necessarily wide. 

3.7.6 Statistical Significance Testing 

To establish that the agent’s accuracy exceeds the random baseline with statistical confidence, we apply a one-sided exact binomial test. Under the null hypothesis that the agent selects the correct pose independently for each system with probability equal to the random baseline p0 = Acc rand (Equation 14), the probability of observing k or more successes out of m systems is 

p-value = P (X ≥ k | m, p 0) = 

> m

X

> j=k

mj



p j 

> 0

(1 − p0)m−j , (16) where X ∼ Binomial( m, p 0). We reject the null hypothesis at the α = 0 .05 significance level if the p-value falls below 0.05. 24 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses The exact binomial test is preferred over asymptotic alternatives (e.g. the z-test for proportions) because the sample size ( m = 10 ) is too small for the normal approximation to be reliable, and the null success probability ( p0 ≈ 0.077 )lies far from 0.5, exacerbating the approximation error. The test treats each system as an independent Bernoulli trial, a reasonable assumption given that the ten systems involve different proteins, ligands, and pose sets with no shared structural or chemical features. 

3.7.7 Decision Attribution Analysis 

Beyond measuring whether the agent identifies the correct pose, we analyse how it arrives at its decision. For each system the agent produces (i) a final pose selection backed by free-text reasoning and (ii) explicit self-reported percentage weights {wi,t }Tt=1 that quantify the importance it assigned to each of T tool categories in making its choice (Section 3.4). We exploit this structured output to perform two complementary analyses. 

Metric separation. For each system i and tool category t, we define the metric separation of the selected pose as the signed, standardised distance between the selected pose’s metric value and the candidate-set mean, oriented so that positive values indicate a favourable direction: 

δi,t = st · vi,t, ˆgi − ¯vi,t 

σi,t 

, (17) where vi,t,j is the scalar metric value produced by tool t for pose j of system i, ¯vi,t and σi,t are the mean and standard deviation of that metric across all Ni candidate poses, and st ∈ { +1 , −1} is a sign factor that ensures higher δi,t 

corresponds to a more favourable outcome ( st = +1 for metrics where larger is better, such as interaction quality score and burial ratio; st = −1 for metrics where smaller is better, such as clash energy, conformational strain, and polar penalty score). A large positive δi,t indicates that the selected pose stands out favourably on tool t; a value near zero indicates that tool t does not differentiate the selected pose from the rest of the candidate set. 

Reasoning faithfulness. We assess whether the agent’s self-reported tool weights align with the objective metric separations by comparing the two rank orderings. For each system i, let wi = ( wi, 1, . . . , w i,T ) be the vector of stated weights and δi = ( |δi, 1|, . . . , |δi,T |) be the vector of absolute metric separations. Concordance between the two is measured by the Spearman rank correlation ρi between wi and δi:

ρi = Spearman  rank( wi), rank( δi) . (18) A high positive ρi indicates faithful reasoning: the agent assigns greater weight to tools on which the selected pose genuinely excels relative to the candidate set. A weak or negative ρi suggests that the stated rationale may not reflect the actual metric basis of the decision, a potential concern given that chain-of-thought explanations from large language models are not guaranteed to be faithful to the model’s actual decision process [ 27 , 28 ]. We report both the per-system 

ρi values and the median across systems. 

Outcome-stratified attribution. To identify whether tool reliance patterns differ between correct and incorrect decisions, we partition the systems by outcome and compare the weight distributions. For each tool category t, we compute the mean stated weight across correctly identified systems ( ¯w ✓ 

> t

) and incorrectly identified systems ( ¯w × 

> t

): 

¯w ✓ 

> t

= 1

|C| 

X

> i∈C

wi,t , ¯w × 

> t

= 1

|I| 

X

> i∈I

wi,t , (19) where C and I denote the sets of systems with correct and incorrect identifications, respectively. Systematic differences between ¯w ✓ 

> t

and ¯w × 

> t

across tool categories may reveal failure modes, for example, whether incorrect decisions are associated with over-reliance on interaction quantity at the expense of interaction quality, or with insufficient attention to steric clashes. Because the analysis is based on m = 10 systems, the attribution results are reported descriptively (e.g. as heatmaps of tool weights and metric separations stratified by outcome) rather than as the basis for formal inferential claims. The primary goal is to generate actionable hypotheses about the agent’s reasoning patterns that can guide future prompt engineering and tool design. 25 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

# 4 Results 

4.1 Benchmark Summary 

The benchmark comprises ten protein-ligand systems (162 docked poses, 5 to 20 per system) drawn from PDBbind 2016 and balanced between five Smina-success controls and five Smina-failure targets (Table 1; Section 3.6.4). All ground-truth RMSDs fall within the 2.0 Å near-native threshold (range: 0.43 to 1.97 Å; Section 3.7.1), and the evaluation uses a without-native configuration in which the crystallographic pose is excluded from the candidate pool. This balanced design fixes the Smina scoring baseline at 50.0% by construction; uniformly random selection yields an expected accuracy of 7.7% (Equation 14). 

4.2 Best-Pose Identification Accuracy 

Across the ten benchmark systems, the agentic pipeline correctly identified the ground-truth best pose in 5 of 10 cases, yielding a best-pose identification accuracy of 50.0% (Equation 11). The associated 95% Wilson score confidence interval is [23.7%, 76.3%] (Equation 12), reflecting the substantial uncertainty inherent in a ten-system evaluation. An exact one-sided binomial test (Equation 16) against the averaged random selection baseline of 7.7% (Equation 14) yields p < 0.001 , indicating that the agent’s accuracy is significantly above chance at the α = 0 .05 level. Because per-system pose counts vary (5 to 20), the exact null distribution under uniformly random selection is a Poisson-binomial with system-specific probabilities 1/N i rather than a single-parameter binomial with p0 = 0 .077 ; the binomial approximation adopted here inflates the variance of the null and is therefore conservative for a one-sided test, so the conclusion that the agent beats indiscriminate guessing is robust to this refinement. The observed accuracy exceeds the averaged random baseline by a factor of 6.5. Compared with the Smina scoring baseline of 50.0% (Section 4.1), the agent achieves numerically identical overall accuracy. However, the composition of the agent’s successes and failures differs from Smina’s: the agent correctly identified the best pose in 4 of 5 Smina-success systems and 1 of 5 Smina-failure systems, whereas Smina, by construction of the benchmark, succeeds on all 5 Smina-success systems and fails on all 5 Smina-failure systems. This difference in error distribution indicates that the agent partially recovers from scoring-function failures (1 recovery on the Smina-failure partition) while introducing one regression on the Smina-success partition; the net effect is zero change in aggregate accuracy. The partition-stratified analysis in Section 4.4 examines these trade-offs in detail. Table 2 summarises the accuracy metrics. The agent’s performance is situated between the random baseline (7.7%) and the upper bound of the Wilson confidence interval (76.3%), with the point estimate coinciding with the Smina baseline. The wide confidence interval underscores the need for larger-scale validation, while the highly significant binomial test confirms that the pipeline’s selections are not attributable to chance. 

Metric Value 

Agent accuracy 50.0% (5/10) Wilson 95% CI [23.7%, 76.3%] Smina baseline 50.0% (5/10) Random baseline 7.7% 

p-value (vs. random) < 0.001 

Agent / random ratio 6.5 ×

Table 2: Best-pose identification accuracy of the agentic pipeline compared with the Smina scoring and random selection baselines across ten benchmark systems. The Wilson score 95% confidence interval (Equation 12) quantifies uncertainty from the small sample. The p-value is from a one-sided exact binomial test (Equation 16) against the random baseline. Figure 2 compares the agent and Smina accuracies against the random selection baseline. Both methods achieve the same point estimate, but the overlapping Wilson confidence intervals highlight the limited statistical power of a ten-system benchmark to discriminate between methods of similar performance. Although the agent and Smina achieve the same overall accuracy, the binary pass/fail metric does not capture how close the agent’s incorrect selections are to the true near-native conformation. The following section examines the RMSD of the agent’s selected poses to quantify the severity of misidentifications. 26 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Figure 2: Best-pose identification accuracy for the agentic pipeline and the Smina scoring baseline, with 95% Wilson score confidence intervals (error bars). The dashed line indicates the expected accuracy under uniformly random selection (7.7%; Equation 14). Both methods achieve 50.0% accuracy ( n = 10 systems), though their per-system agreement patterns differ (see Section 4.4). 

4.3 RMSD of Selected Poses 

The binary accuracy metric of Section 4.2 treats every misidentification equally, regardless of whether the agent selected a pose 0.5 Å or 5 Å away from the ground truth. The RMSD deviation ∆RMSD ,i (Equation 13) provides a continuous, structurally grounded complement: it measures how much additional displacement the agent’s choice introduces relative to the best available docked conformation. Table 3 reports the per-system results. 

System Selected GT pose Correct? Sel. RMSD (Å) GT RMSD (Å) ∆RMSD (Å) Severity 

185L pose_01 pose_01 ✓ 0.43 0.43 0.00 Correct 1ERR pose_01 pose_01 ✓ 0.82 0.82 0.00 Correct 2HYY pose_01 pose_01 ✓ 0.85 0.85 0.00 Correct 3OXC pose_02 pose_02 ✓ 0.63 0.63 0.00 Correct 2P16 pose_01 pose_01 ✓ 1.24 1.24 0.00 Correct 4JFL pose_01 pose_03 × 3.27 1.76 1.51 Moderate 4MLT pose_01 pose_07 × 3.13 1.16 1.97 Moderate 2HA6 pose_03 pose_19 × 4.72 1.89 2.82 Severe 4ZLS pose_08 pose_20 × 5.92 1.97 3.95 Severe 3HS4 pose_02 pose_01 × 5.28 0.96 4.32 Severe Table 3: Per-system RMSD of the agent’s selected pose to the crystallographic binding mode, the ground-truth best-pose RMSD, the RMSD deviation ∆RMSD (Equation 13), and the resulting severity category. Correct identifications (∆RMSD = 0 ) are marked with a tick; misidentifications are categorised as moderate ( 1.0 ≤ ∆RMSD < 2.0 Å) or severe ( ∆RMSD ≥ 2.0 Å). All RMSD values are symmetry-corrected heavy-atom RMSDs computed against the crystallographic ligand conformation. Across all ten benchmark systems, the mean RMSD of the agent’s selected pose to the crystallographic binding mode is 2.63 Å (range 0.43–5.92 Å; median 2.18 Å). Restricting to the five correctly identified systems, all selected poses lie well within the 2.0 Å near-native threshold, with a maximum RMSD of 1.24 Å (2P16). Across the five misidentified 

systems, the mean ∆RMSD is 2.92 Å (median 2.82 Å; maximum 4.32 Å), and the mean selected-pose RMSD is 4.46 Å, 27 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses indicating that the misidentifications correspond to poses in substantially different orientations rather than near-misses close to the ground truth. Applying the severity thresholds defined in the Methods, none of the five misidentifications falls in the mild category ( 0 <

∆RMSD < 1.0 Å). Two systems exhibit moderate deviation: 4JFL ( ∆RMSD = 1 .51 Å) and 4MLT ( ∆RMSD = 1 .97 Å). In both cases the selected pose remains plausibly near the correct binding pocket, though with meaningful geometric displacement. The remaining three misidentifications are severe ( ∆RMSD ≥ 2.0 Å): 2HA6 ( ∆RMSD = 2 .82 Å), 4ZLS (∆RMSD = 3 .95 Å), and 3HS4 ( ∆RMSD = 4 .32 Å). These three systems represent cases where the agent selected a pose in a substantially different orientation from the ground-truth binding mode, and the severity of the error warrants detailed investigation in the Representative System Analysis (Section 4.5). From a practical standpoint, a pose with RMSD below 2.0 Å to the crystal structure is generally considered near-native and useful for lead optimisation. Of the ten agent-selected poses, exactly five (50.0%) satisfy this criterion, the five correctly identified systems (Table 3). The five misidentified poses all have RMSD values above 3.0 Å, meaning that in every failure case the agent selected a pose outside the near-native threshold and therefore of limited direct utility for structure-based drug design. No misidentification falls in the mild category ( ∆RMSD < 1.0 Å), but this observation must be interpreted against the available pose landscape. In two of the five systems (4ZLS, 4MLT), the docked-pose pool contains no conformation with ∆RMSD < 1.0 Å relative to the ground truth, so a mild error was geometrically impossible regardless of the agent’s reasoning. In the remaining three systems (3HS4, 4JFL, 2HA6), poses with ∆RMSD < 1.0 Å were available (two, two, and six candidates, respectively), yet the agent bypassed all of them in favour of a substantially more distant conformation. Figure 3 displays the per-system selected-pose RMSD alongside the ground-truth RMSD and the ∆RMSD of each misidentified system. The partition-stratified analysis in Section 4.4 examines whether error severity is concentrated in Smina-failure systems or distributed across both partitions. 

Figure 3: (a) Heavy-atom symmetry-corrected RMSD to the crystallographic binding mode for the agent-selected pose (orange), the ground-truth best pose (teal), and the Smina-selected pose (green) across all ten benchmark systems. The dashed red line marks the 2.0 Å near-native threshold. Tick labels below bars indicate correct (Y) or incorrect (N) agent identifications. (b) RMSD deviation ∆RMSD (Equation 13) for the five misidentified systems, with shading indicating mild (green; none observed), moderate (orange; 1.0 ≤ ∆RMSD < 2.0 Å), and severe (red; ∆RMSD ≥ 2.0 Å) categories. 

4.4 Partition-Stratified Accuracy 

Having characterised the structural quality of the agent’s selections via RMSD, we now examine whether the overall 50.0% accuracy is uniformly distributed across the benchmark or whether it masks an asymmetry between systems where Smina already succeeds and those where it fails. This partition-stratified analysis (Equation 15; Section 3.7.5) is the primary diagnostic for the added value of the agentic approach: does the pipeline merely replicate the scoring function on easy cases, or does it genuinely recover near-native poses that the scoring function misses? 28 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses On the five Smina-success systems (185L, 1ERR, 2HYY, 2P16, 3HS4), the agent correctly identified the ground-truth best pose in four cases, yielding Acc + = 80 .0% (4/5; Equation 15). The sole regression occurred in 3HS4, where the agent selected pose_02 instead of the ground-truth pose_01 despite Smina ranking the correct pose first. The Acc + of 80.0% substantially exceeds the partition-specific random baseline of 10.4% (factor of 7.7 ×), confirming that the agent retains strong discriminative ability on systems that the scoring function handles well. On the five Smina-failure systems (2HA6, 3OXC, 4JFL, 4MLT, 4ZLS), the agent successfully recovered the ground-truth best pose in one case, yielding Acc − = 20 .0% (1/5; Equation 15). The single recovery was system 3OXC, where the agent correctly identified pose_02 as the near-native conformation despite Smina ranking it second. The four remaining Smina-failure systems (2HA6, 4JFL, 4MLT, 4ZLS) were not recovered; the agent’s selections in these cases correspond to severe or moderate RMSD deviations (Table 3). At 20.0%, Acc − remains substantially above the partition-specific random baseline of 5.1% (factor of 4.0 ×), indicating that the agent’s ranking is not random, but the recovery rate is limited. Table 4 cross-classifies each system by the joint Smina and agent outcome. Because the single regression (3HS4) and the single recovery (3OXC) cancel, the overall accuracy remains unchanged relative to Smina. 

Partition Category Systems System IDs 

Smina-success A: both correct 4 185L, 1ERR, 2HYY, 2P16 B: regression 1 3HS4 Smina-failure C: recovery 1 3OXC D: both incorrect 4 2HA6, 4JFL, 4MLT, 4ZLS 

Partition Agent accuracy Smina accuracy Random baseline 

Smina-success ( Acc +) 80.0% (4/5) 100.0% (5/5) 10.4% Smina-failure ( Acc −) 20.0% (1/5) 0.0% (0/5) 5.1% Overall 50.0% (5/10) 50.0% (5/10) 7.7% Table 4: Partition-stratified accuracy of the agentic pipeline across the ten benchmark systems. Systems are classified by the joint outcome of the Smina and agent decisions: Category A (both correct), B (Smina correct, agent incorrect, regression), C (Smina incorrect, agent correct, recovery), and D (both incorrect). Partition-specific random baselines use the mean of 1/N i across the five systems in each partition, where Ni is the number of candidate poses for system i.Taken together, the contrast between Acc + and Acc − suggests that the multi-metric evaluation currently acts conserva-tively, often arriving at conclusions similar to the scoring function rather than overriding it on the basis of physics-based signals. Because each partition comprises only five systems, the estimates are fragile. A single additional recovery would shift Acc − from 20.0% to 40.0%, so these partition-level values should be read as descriptive rather than statistically definitive. Figure 4 shows the grouped bar chart comparing the agentic pipeline and Smina scoring function across both partitions, together with the partition-specific random baselines. The Representative System Analysis in Section 4.5 examines four concrete systems, one from each cell of the Smina-outcome × Agent-outcome matrix (3OXC, 2P16, 3HS4, and 4JFL), providing a qualitative explanation for the metric patterns that drove both successes and failures. 

4.5 Representative System Analysis 

The preceding aggregate analyses establish the pipeline’s overall accuracy and error severity. To illustrate how the agent arrives at its decisions in practice, we examine four representative systems, one from each cell of the Smina-outcome 

× Agent-outcome classification matrix (Table 4). For each system, we present the agent’s selection, the key metric comparisons, and verbatim excerpts from the reasoning trace that demonstrate the auditability of the agentic approach. The cases are presented in category order (A–D), progressing from agreement through regression and recovery to joint failure. Figure 5 provides structural context for the four systems, showing how each agent-selected pose compares spatially to the crystallographic reference ligand within the protein binding site. 

Category A: Agreement: 2P16 (Smina success, agent success). System 2P16 ( β-trypsin, 20 candidate poses) exemplifies a challenging case in which Smina and the agent agree on the same correct answer, pose_01 (RMSD 1.24 Å), but the agent provides a richer, auditable justification (Figure 5a). The ensemble was dominated by docking artifacts: 9 of 20 poses (45.0%) were classified as SURFACE binders, and no pose achieved DEEP _POCKET classification (best burial 55.6%). Table 5 shows the metric profile of the selected pose and its closest competitors. 29 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Figure 4: Partition-stratified best-pose identification accuracy for the agentic pipeline (teal) and Smina scoring (orange) on the Smina-success ( Acc +) and Smina-failure ( Acc −) partitions of the ten-system benchmark. Dashed horizontal segments indicate the partition-specific random baseline (mean of 1/N i across the five systems in each partition). Each partition contains n = 5 systems; the achievable accuracy values are {0, 20 , 40 , 60 , 80 , 100 }%.

Metric pose_01 (selected) pose_03 pose_04 

TQS 3.72 4.50 6.32 Burial ratio 55.6% 52.8% 50.0% Binding mode quality 0.56 — —Strain (kcal/mol) 77.30 77.54 96.54 Steric clashes 1 0 1Polar penalty 1.00 1.50 1.50 H-bonds 2 (avg quality 0.59) — —Table 5: Metric comparison for the agent’s selected pose (pose_01) and the two closest competitors in system 2P16. All three poses are classified as PARTIAL _POCKET ; no ensemble member achieved DEEP _POCKET status. pose_04 had the highest total quality score (TQS; Equation 6) in the ensemble but was penalised for extreme conformational strain. 

Metric overview and binding mode gating. The agent’s strategy centred on using the binding mode classification tool as a gating filter. As the reasoning trace states: 

“I first eliminated SURFACE-mode poses from top consideration. pose_01 is one of the few poses that engages the pocket best among this set, with the highest burial in the dataset (55.6% buried), classified as PARTIAL_POCKET with the top binding-mode quality score (0.56). In a dataset where no pose reaches DEEP_POCKET (>70% burial), this deeper-than-peers engagement is a decisive advantage.” 

Notably, the agent rejected pose_04 (Figure 6b) despite its highest-in-set TQS of 6.32, reasoning that “the interaction quality advantage does not plausibly offset ∼20 kcal/mol extra conformational cost in the absence of superior burial or polar management.” The agent further highlighted that pose_01’s chemically diversified interaction network (Figure 6a), comprising an excellent H-bond to GLY216A (2.81 Å, 162.2°), a π-stack to TYR99A, and a water bridge to SER195A, was “somewhat undercounted by the reported total quality” because the TQS does not include π-stacking and water bridge contributions. 

Deliberative process and adaptive weighting. Importantly, the reasoning trace reveals that the agent did not converge on pose_01 immediately. The Chain of Thought records an intermediate stage in which the agent leaned towards a different candidate: “pose_04 has the best total quality at 6.32 but comes with extremely high strain. Finally, it looks like pose_03 might be the most balanced choice based on overall metrics and lower strain values compared to pose_04.” 

30 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

(a) 2P16 (Category A, agreement). The agent’s selected pose_01 (green; RMSD 1.24 Å) closely overlaps the crystallographic ligand (grey), confirming correct near-native identification. 

(b) 3HS4 (Category B, regression). The agent’s selected pose_02 (orange; RMSD 5.28 Å) is spatially displaced from both the crystallographic ligand (grey) and the correct pose_01 (green; RMSD 0.96 Å). 

(c) 3OXC (Category C, recovery). The agent’s selected pose_02 (green; RMSD 0.63 Å) overlaps the crystallographic ligand (grey), while Smina’s top-ranked pose_01 (orange; RMSD 11.00 Å) adopts an inverted orientation within the HIV-1 pro-tease binding channel, yielding a large heavy-atom RMSD de-spite remaining within the active site. 

(d) 4JFL (Category D, instructive failure). The agent’s se-lected pose_01 (orange; RMSD 3.27 Å) and the correct pose_03 (green; RMSD 1.76 Å) both occupy the FKBP51 binding pocket, with the displacement concentrated in the solvent-exposed tail of the molecule. 

Figure 5: Binding-site views of the four representative systems from the Smina-outcome × Agent-outcome classification matrix. In each panel the protein is shown with binding-site residues in standard element colours. The crystallographic reference ligand is rendered in grey; the agent-selected or ground-truth near-native pose is shown in green; incorrectly ranked poses are shown in orange. All panels were generated with Maestro [52]. 31 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses   

> (a) Interaction network of the agent’s selected pose_01 (green) with binding-site residues, including the hydrogen bond to GLY216A and the π-stack to TYR99A. The crystallographic ligand is shown in grey.
> (b) Overlay of the selected pose_01 (green; RMSD 1.24 Å) and the rejected competitor pose_04 (orange; RMSD 3.28 Å). Despite pose_04’s highest-in-set TQS of 6.32, the agent rejected it for ∼20 kcal/mol additional conformational strain.

Figure 6: Structural details for system 2P16. (a) Key protein–ligand interactions for the agent’s selected pose. (b) Spatial comparison of the selected pose against the rejected highest-scoring competitor. The crystallographic ligand is shown in grey in both panels. It was only after systematically applying the binding mode filter and re-evaluating burial rankings that pose_01 emerged as the top selection. This iterative deliberation underscores that the agent’s final answer is not the output of a single scoring pass but the product of an explicit hypothesis-revision cycle. Crucially, the agent also adapted its metric weights to the characteristics of this specific ensemble rather than relying on a fixed formula: 

“The set contains many SURFACE poses; therefore, pocket engagement must be a strong discriminator (binding mode + burial = 45% combined).” 

By allocating 45% of its composite weight to pocket engagement (25% binding mode + 20% burial), the agent ensured that the dominant failure mode of this ensemble, surface binding, would be the primary axis of discrimination. Its treatment of strain was similarly context-sensitive: “Strain is used to break ties among similarly pocketed, similarly interacting poses; however, all poses show very high strain, so differences of a few kcal/mol are not decisive unless very large ( ≥15–20 kcal/mol) and uncompensated.” This explicit articulation of a quantitative threshold, rather than a blind penalty, illustrates the kind of reasoned, auditable judgement that a single-score function cannot provide. 

Self-aware limitations and scientific judgement. Beyond ranking, the agent exercised self-critical scientific judge-ment by flagging the limitations of its own metrics. In the Confidence Assessment, it noted: “All poses exhibit very high strain energies; while I used strain as a tiebreaker, the absolute MMFF-derived values may be inflated or system-dependent. Relative differences were considered rather than absolutes.” This awareness of force-field artefacts, distinguishing relative from absolute energetics, mirrors the reasoning that a computational chemist would apply when interpreting MMFF strain values. The agent further questioned the upstream docking protocol itself: 

“No pose attains DEEP_POCKET classification. If the true site is deep, docking may have partially failed, which lowers overall confidence.” Such a hypothesis is notable because it shifts responsibility from the ranking step to the pose-generation step, illustrating that the agent can reason about the provenance of its inputs rather than treating them as given. Even at the individual-pose level, the agent exercised quality-over-quantity reasoning. When evaluating competitor pose_09, which reported five hydrogen bonds, the agent observed that “H-bond geometry is only marginal on average (0.45) despite 5 reported H-bonds, suggesting overcounting of weakly supportive interactions.” The Key Findings section reinforced this multi-metric tension across the full ensemble: “High conformational strain across the board (66–97 kcal/mol). Only small relative differences exist among pocketed poses; two SURFACE poses have the lowest strain but are disqualified by binding mode.” Taken together, these passages demonstrate that the agent does not merely aggregate metrics; it interprets them with domain-appropriate caveats, identifies the conditions under which each metric is, or is not, decisive, and propagates uncertainty into its confidence estimate. 32 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Confidence assessment, synthesis, and suggested experiments. The agent reported a confidence level of “Medium” and explicitly identified the additional data that would raise it, including “local minimization with side-chain repacking and explicit-water placement for the top poses to reassess strain, clashes, and H-bonding” as well as “experimental footprinting or site-directed mutagenesis (e.g., GLY216A, TYR99A, PHE174A) to confirm the contact pattern.” The latter suggestion reveals embedded domain knowledge: the agent nominated the very residues it identified as key interaction partners, connecting its computational findings to a testable experimental hypothesis. Its final synthesis encapsulated the multi-metric reasoning in a single passage: 

“pose_01’s combination of the best burial, a coherent and chemically sensible interaction network (including one excellent H-bond and a stabilising π contact to TYR99A), low clash burden, and manageable polar penalty outweighs its only moderate total quality score and the generally high strain that affects nearly all poses here.” 

This sentence is precisely the kind of structured, multi-factor justification that a single docking score cannot express: it names the decisive features (burial, interaction coherence), acknowledges the weaknesses (moderate TQS, high strain), and contextualises the weaknesses as ensemble-wide rather than pose-specific. This case demonstrates the explainability advantage of the agentic approach: whereas Smina merely assigns an affinity score and this relies on the pre-defined terms and weights of the scoring function, the agent’s trace provides a complete audit of which physical features favoured the selected pose, which competitors were considered, and why they were rejected. The remaining three Category A systems (185L, 1ERR, 2HYY) were cleaner cases where the best pose was separated from competitors by wider metric margins and did not require extensive tiebreaking logic. 

Category B: Regression: 3HS4 (Smina success, agent failure). System 3HS4 (carbonic anhydrase II, 20 candidate poses) is the sole regression case in the benchmark: Smina correctly ranked pose_01 (RMSD 0.96 Å) first, but the agent selected pose_02 instead, with high confidence (Figure 5b). This case reveals a fundamental limitation: the correct pose can score poorly on computed metrics relative to a competing conformation. The structural consequences are substantial: the agent’s selected pose_02 has an RMSD of 5.28 Å to the crystallographic binding mode, compared with 0.96 Å for the ground-truth pose_01 ( ∆RMSD = 4 .32 Å, classified as severe in Table 3), the largest RMSD deviation in the entire benchmark. Table 6 contrasts the two poses. 

Metric pose_02 (selected) pose_01 (correct) 

TQS 6.52 3.23 H-bonds (avg quality) 5 (0.62) 4 (0.63) Hydrophobic contacts (total) 4 (3.40) 1 (0.70) 

π-stacking 1 (HIS94A) 0Burial ratio 93.8% 75.0% Binding mode quality 1.00 0.83 Strain (kcal/mol) 47.08 46.45 Steric clashes 0 2Polar penalty 1.00 0.50 Ligand efficiency 0.769 (excellent) 0.462 (excellent) Table 6: Metric comparison for the agent’s selected pose (pose_02) and the ground-truth best pose (pose_01) in system 3HS4. pose_02 dominates on nearly every metric the agent evaluates; pose_01 does not appear in the agent’s top-7 ranking. 

Why the agent was wrong with high confidence. The metrics in Table 6 explain both why the agent selected pose_02 and why the failure carries an important lesson. pose_02 dominated on every axis the agent evaluates: it achieved the highest TQS in the 20-pose ensemble (6.52 vs. 3.23 for pose_01, a 2.0-fold difference), the deepest burial (93.8% vs. 75.0%), zero steric clashes (vs. 2), a π-stacking contact with HIS94A absent from pose_01, and the best ligand efficiency in the set (0.769). The agent stated: 

“The selected pose, pose_02, is the only pose that simultaneously achieves the highest interaction quality (Total Quality Score 6.52), a true DEEP_POCKET binding mode with exceptional burial (93.8% of ligand atoms buried; classification quality 1.00), [and] zero steric clashes. [. . . ] This three-way advantage (quality, deep burial, geometric cleanliness) is decisive under the stated weighting scheme.” 

33 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses Critically, the ground-truth pose_01 does not appear in the agent’s reasoning trace or top-7 ranking at all. Its modest TQS of 3.23 and lower burial placed it below the agent’s attention threshold. The sole metrics where pose_01 was superior, slightly lower strain (46.45 vs. 47.08 kcal/mol, a difference of only 0.63 kcal/mol) and a marginally better polar penalty (0.50 vs. 1.00), were heavily outweighed under the agent’s 32%/32% interaction-plus-burial weighting scheme. 

Adaptive weighting and thermodynamic commensuration. The weight-setting process itself reveals ensemble-aware adaptation. In its key findings, the agent characterised the 3HS4 landscape as unusually clean: “Most poses classify as DEEP_POCKET with good-to-excellent burial; a few are PARTIAL_POCKET (pose_13, pose_17, pose_20). No clear SURFACE artifacts were present, which is good.” Unlike the 2P16 ensemble, where 9 of 20 poses were  

> SURFACE

binders, the 3HS4 pool was predominantly well-docked, leaving the binding mode classifier with limited discriminatory power. The decisive burden therefore fell on interaction quality and secondary penalty metrics, and the agent adapted its strain treatment accordingly: “Given the uniformly high strain across the dataset, strain was used as a tie-breaker and assigned a smaller but non-negligible weight,” while “clashes and polar penalties were weighted more than strain because they directly reflect physical plausibility and thermodynamic penalties not otherwise captured by the quality score.” This weighting inversion, elevating clashes and polar penalties above strain, reflects a pharmacologically sound judgement: in an ensemble where all conformations carry similarly inflated strain values (44–53 kcal/mol), differential clash and polar profiles carry more information about relative binding plausibility. The reasoning chain further reveals an attempt to ground abstract penalty scores in approximate thermodynamic costs: 

“Each unit may represent a cost of about 2–3 kcal per unsatisfied polar atom. pose_05’s 0 unsatisfied polar atoms would save it around 4–6 kcal compared to pose_02. However, pose_02 has a much better total quality and burial. Despite the polar penalties, pose_05’s high strain makes it less favorable.” 

This conversion, estimating ∼2–3 kcal/mol per buried unsatisfied polar atom, demonstrates a form of thermodynamic commensuration rarely performed by automated scoring tools. The agent placed heterogeneous metrics on an approx-imate common energy scale, weighed competing advantages, and concluded that pose_02’s interaction and burial superiority outweighed the estimated 4–6 kcal/mol polar desolvation cost. Yet it maintained appropriate epistemic caution about its own framework, noting that “it’s not helpful to equate TQS values directly to energy” , acknowledging that interaction quality is a geometric surrogate, not a free energy estimate. 

Confidence assessment and self-identified limitations. The agent assigned high confidence to its selection of pose_02 despite explicitly acknowledging several methodological limitations. In its key findings, the agent attributed the uniformly elevated strain values to a specific force-field limitation: 

“Conformational strain is consistently very high for all poses. This is atypical in absolute terms and likely reflects limitations of the MMFF reference or unminimized bound states.” 

By naming MMFF specifically, the agent attributed the anomalous strain landscape (44–53 kcal/mol across all 20 poses) to a known limitation of the reference force field rather than treating these values as physically meaningful absolute penalties, a methodologically appropriate response that justified the decision to use strain only as a relative tie-breaker. The uncertainty section of the confidence assessment reiterated this reasoning: “Conformational strain values are uniformly very high across the dataset (44–53 kcal/mol), suggesting force field or reference conformer artifacts. I treated strain as a relative tie-breaker rather than an absolute discriminator.” The agent further flagged ranking fragility, cautioning that “water-mediated networks and protonation states can subtly influence both H-bond detection and polar satisfaction; explicit hydration or pKa refinement might reshuffle close runners-up slightly.” This acknowledgement identifies precise physical factors, explicit water bridges and protonation-dependent hydrogen bonding, that neither the agent’s tool suite nor Smina’s empirical scoring function captures, and which may partly explain why pose_01, the crystallographic answer, was invisible to the metric landscape of both approaches. The juxtaposition of high confidence with candid uncertainty disclosure is itself informative: the agent was confident in its ranking given the available metrics , while recognising that those metrics may not encompass all determinants of binding. The failure is therefore not one of reasoning coherence but of tool-suite coverage. 

Cross-system contrast: context-dependent tool roles. The comparison between 3HS4 and the Category A system 2P16 illustrates how the same tool suite plays fundamentally different roles across ensembles. In 2P16, the binding mode classifier was the decisive instrument: it eliminated 9 of 20 poses (45.0%) as SURFACE binders, collapsing the candidate pool before interaction quality was assessed. In 3HS4, by contrast, only three PARTIAL _POCKET outliers required deprioritisation. As the agent stated: “Partial_pocket binders (pose_13, pose_17, pose_20) were deprioritized 

34 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

per the classifier; even when polar penalties were favorable, their shallower engagement reduces confidence relative to true deep pocket binders.” With the binding mode filter providing only marginal discrimination, the agent relied instead on interaction quality, clash profiles, and polar penalties to separate the remaining 17 DEEP _POCKET conformations. This shift manifested in how secondary metrics were deployed: for example, the agent flagged that “pose_16 shows an unusually high clash severity (0.099), a red flag despite decent interaction quality (3.31) and burial (75%)” , using clash 

severity , not merely count, as a discriminator within an otherwise homogeneous ensemble. The same tools thus served as hard gates in one context and fine-grained discriminators in another, illustrating the adaptive, context-dependent nature of the agent’s deliberative framework. 

Smina scoring-term decomposition. Decomposing Smina’s scoring function into its five component terms [ 5]clarifies which physical dimensions separate pose_01 from pose_02 and, by extension, what the agent’s tool suite fails to capture. Table 7 reports the per-term raw values and their weighted contributions for both poses. 

Term Weight p01 raw p01 wtd p02 raw p02 wtd ∆ wtd 

gauss 1 (shape) −0.036 59.64 −2.12 64.97 −2.31 −0.19 

gauss 2 (volume) −0.005 804.56 −4.15 904.37 −4.66 −0.52 

repulsion 0.840 9.78 8.22 4.35 3.66 −4.56 

hydrophobic −0.035 2.89 −0.10 10.22 −0.36 −0.26 

non-dir. H-bond −0.587 7.92 −4.65 6.44 −3.79 +0 .87 

Total −2.81 −7.46 −4.65 

Table 7: Smina scoring-term decomposition for the ground-truth pose (pose_01) and the agent’s selected pose (pose_02) in system 3HS4, obtained by single-point rescoring ( –score_only ) of the docked coordinates. Each raw term value is multiplied by a learned weight to produce its contribution; negative weighted values are favourable. 

∆ = pose_02 − pose_01. In four of five terms, pose_02 is favourable: it achieves better shape complementarity (gauss 1, gauss 2), 3.5-fold stronger hydrophobic contacts, and substantially lower steric repulsion (4.35 vs. 9.78 raw), which alone accounts for a weighted advantage of 4.56 kcal/mol. These four dimensions map directly onto the agent’s own metrics (burial ratio, hydrophobic contacts, and clash detection), and both systems agree that pose_02 is superior on all of them. The sole term favouring pose_01 is the non-directional hydrogen-bond function, which sums pairwise donor–acceptor proximity without angular cutoffs: 7.92 vs. 6.44 raw (weighted advantage 0.87 kcal/mol for pose_01). This result exposes a specific discrepancy with the agent’s tools. PLIP detects more hydrogen bonds for pose_02 than for pose_01 (5 vs. 4, Table 6), because PLIP applies strict geometric criteria (distance and angle thresholds) that count individual well-formed contacts. Smina’s distance-only function captures a broader measure of polar complementarity: the cumulative proximity of all donor and acceptor atoms to their protein partners, including weak or geometrically suboptimal contacts that PLIP does not register. The crystallographic binding mode, having been refined against electron density, places polar atoms at distances that maximise this cumulative proximity even when individual contact angles fall outside PLIP’s detection thresholds. The polar penalty tool partially captured this signal: pose_01 has one unsatisfied buried polar atom (penalty 0.50) while pose_02 has two (penalty 1.00). But the polar penalty operates only as a deficit counter, it penalises unsatisfied polar atoms without rewarding the degree of polar complementarity, and its contribution was overwhelmed by the 2.0-fold TQS advantage and 18.8 percentage-point burial differential that favoured pose_02 under the agent’s weighting scheme. The Smina decomposition therefore identifies a concrete tool-suite gap: a continuous measure of polar complementarity that rewards well-satisfied polar environments, not merely penalises unsatisfied ones. Such a metric would have narrowed the scoring differential between pose_01 and pose_02 and potentially brought the correct pose within the agent’s attention threshold. 

Category C: Recovery: 3OXC (Smina failure, agent success). System 3OXC (HIV-1 protease, 19 candidate poses) represents the single recovery in the benchmark (Figure 5c). Smina selected pose_01 (RMSD 11.00 Å) as its top-ranked pose by affinity, placing the correct near-native conformation, pose_02 (RMSD 0.63 Å), second. The agent reversed this ranking and promoted pose_02 to first. The decisive factor was conformational strain used as a tiebreaker between two deep-pocket binders with similar interaction profiles. Table 8 compares the agent’s selected pose against Smina’s top-ranked pose and the agent’s closest competitor in its own deliberation (pose_06, RMSD 9.51 Å). 

Reasoning trace and strain-based tiebreaker. The agent’s reasoning trace reveals a clear decision pathway. Both pose_02 and pose_06 achieved DEEP _POCKET classification with high burial ratios (80.0% vs. 83.6%) and near-identical 35 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Metric pose_02 (agent) pose_01 (Smina) pose_06 (runner-up) 

TQS 16.81 13.57 17.56 Total interactions 24 20 25 H-bonds (avg quality) 6 (0.88) 6 (0.88) 6 (0.74) Hydrophobic contacts (avg) 14 (0.81) 10 (0.79) 15 (0.84) Burial ratio 80.0% 76.4% 83.6% Binding mode quality 0.89 0.85 0.93 Strain (kcal/mol) 46.06 45.01 66.42 Steric clashes 2 (negligible) 2 (negligible) 2 (small) Polar penalty 2.00 1.00 1.00 Table 8: Metric comparison for system 3OXC across the agent’s selected pose (pose_02, RMSD 0.63 Å), Smina’s top-ranked pose (pose_01, RMSD 11.00 Å), and the agent’s runner-up (pose_06, RMSD 9.51 Å). All three are classified as DEEP _POCKET by the binding mode classifier. 

Figure 7: System 3OXC: overlay of the agent’s selected pose_02 (green; RMSD 0.63 Å) and the rejected runner-up pose_06 (orange; RMSD 9.51 Å). Both achieved DEEP _POCKET classification with comparable interaction profiles (TQS 16.81 vs. 17.56), but the agent selected pose_02 on the basis of a 20 kcal/mol conformational strain advantage (46.06 vs. 66.42 kcal/mol). The crystallographic ligand is shown in grey. interaction counts, making binding mode unable to discriminate between them. The TQS slightly favoured pose_06 (17.56 vs. 16.81; Figure 7), but the agent identified a 20 kcal/mol conformational strain differential as the decisive tiebreaker. In the agent’s own words: 

“With interactions being close (pose_02 16.81 vs pose_06 17.56), the 20+ kcal/mol strain disadvantage for pose_06 is too large to ignore. Given both are deep-pocketed, strain was used as a critical tie-breaker. Therefore, pose_02 outranks pose_06.” 

Deliberative process and decision hierarchy. The selection rationale above conveys the final verdict, but the Chain of Thought reveals how that verdict crystallised during the deliberation. Early in the reasoning, the agent diagnosed an ensemble-level anomaly and set the analytical frame: 

“I need to interpret the high strain across the dataset, which might suggest a force-field mismatch for this ligand and protonation. Even though relative differences between poses matter, I should penalize high strain as a tiebreaker among similarly strong candidates.” 

With this principle established, the agent worked through the top contenders with explicit conditional reasoning: 

“pose_06 shows top quality but suffers from high strain of 66.42. For the best selection, lower strain is preferred, though high strain might be acceptable if interactions are notably better. [. . . ] Despite a worse polar penalty (2.0 vs 1.0), 

36 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

the substantial 20 kcal strain difference favors pose_02.” The strain tiebreaker was therefore formulated as a general policy during the reasoning process and then applied to the specific comparison, rather than appearing as a post-hoc rationalisation in the final output. In parallel, the agent enforced binding mode classification as a categorical gate. When evaluating pose_11 (TQS 17.24, comparable to the top candidates), it concluded: “Per best practice, a DEEP_POCKET pose with slightly inferior metrics outranks a PARTIAL_POCKET pose with slightly superior interaction quality. Thus, pose_11 cannot be #1.” This decision hierarchy, DEEP _POCKET status as a hard filter, interaction quality as the primary discriminator, strain as the final tiebreaker, directly mirrors the hierarchical decision framework encoded in the system prompt (Section 3.4). The agent further demonstrated critical evaluation of its own tool outputs: in the Chain of Thought, it noted that “salt bridge distances over 5.00 Å likely aren’t realistic,” and in the metric breakdown for pose_02 it reinforced this scepticism, observing that “The salt bridges are distant (quality low) but are not needed for ranking given the already excellent H-bond/hydrophobic profile.” Rather than naively incorporating all detected interactions, the agent discounted geometrically implausible contacts, a behaviour that mirrors expert structural biologist judgement. 

Self-aware uncertainty and tool-output anomaly detection. Equally revealing is the agent’s handling of uncertainty and tool-output anomalies. In the Key Findings section, it attributed the systematically elevated strain energies to a specific computational cause: 

“Conformational strain is consistently high across all poses (41–71 kcal/mol), which points to systematic issues (e.g., MMFF94 parameterization or ligand protonation). Use strain as a relative differentiator only.” 

By naming the MMFF94 force field explicitly and recommending relative rather than absolute interpretation, the agent demonstrated awareness that its own tool’s output was partially artefactual, yet still informative for ranking. Despite these acknowledged limitations, the agent did not retreat into indecision; instead, it explicitly identified the conditions under which its ranking might be revised: “A few poses (e.g., pose_06) have very strong quality but extreme strain; if future refinement reduces their strain substantially without degrading interactions, rankings could change.” The agent thus assigned a “Medium” confidence level that was calibrated to the evidence: high enough to recommend a specific pose, yet transparent about the conditions that could alter the outcome. 

Cross-metric trade-offs and emergent correlations. The agent’s reasoning further demonstrates cross-metric trade-off analysis rather than siloed evaluation of individual metrics. When justifying its tolerance of pose_02’s higher polar penalty (4 unsatisfied polars, score 2.00 vs. 1.00 for pose_06), the agent acknowledged the weakness explicitly: 

“I accepted pose_02’s moderate polar penalty (4 unsatisfied polars) because the strong H-bond geometry (+ excellent hydrophobics) suggests net favorable binding; the alternatively lower-polar-penalty poses either had weaker interaction quality or worse burial or were partial-pocket binders.” 

This passage shows the agent reasoning across all metric axes simultaneously: a deficit on one axis (polar satisfaction) is tolerated only because every alternative that performs better on that axis pays a worse price elsewhere. An ensemble-level insight reinforced this contextualisation: “Polar penalties range from minimal (1–2 unsatisfied polars) to concerning (≥5), and large polar penalties usually correlate with lower H-bond quality.” The agent thus discovered an emergent cross-metric correlation, poor polar satisfaction tends to co-occur with weaker hydrogen bonding, directly from the data, and used it to contextualise pose_02’s moderate penalty as an acceptable outlier given its strong hydrogen-bond profile (average quality 0.88). The same multi-axis logic governed the comparison with Smina’s preferred pose_01: “Although pose_01 has slightly better strain and better polar satisfaction, pose_02’s substantially stronger interaction network (∆ quality ∼+3.24; +4 total interactions; more and stronger hydrophobics) outweighed those advantages under the chosen weights.” By quantifying the delta across multiple axes simultaneously, the agent arrived at a transparent, auditable justification for overriding the scoring-function ranking, precisely the kind of interpretable decision trace that a single-score approach cannot provide. This case provides the strongest evidence for the paper’s central thesis: a multi-metric evaluation that preserves individual physical contributions can recover near-native poses that a single-score function misses. Smina’s unified affinity score conflated the favourable interactions of pose_01 (its top-ranked pose, TQS 13.57) with its lower strain profile; the agent’s decomposed evaluation elevated pose_02 on the basis of a superior interaction network while simultaneously penalising the higher-quality competitor (pose_06) for its thermodynamically unfavourable strain. 

Category D: Instructive failure: 4JFL (Smina failure, agent failure). System 4JFL (peptidyl-prolyl isomerase FKBP51, 20 candidate poses) is the most instructive of the four Category D systems because the agent explicitly evaluated and rejected the correct pose (pose_03, RMSD 1.76 Å), providing a fully transparent account of where the reasoning diverged from ground truth (Figure 5d). The agent’s selected pose_01 has an RMSD of 3.27 Å to the 37 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses crystallographic binding mode ( ∆RMSD = 1 .51 Å, classified as moderate in Table 3), placing it near the boundary of a plausible alternative binding mode rather than a catastrophic misprediction. No pose in the ensemble achieved 

> DEEP

_POCKET classification (best burial 64.9%, pose_02), and 4 of 20 were classified as SURFACE binders. Table 9 compares the agent’s selection (pose_01) with the correct pose (pose_03). 

Metric pose_01 (selected) pose_03 (correct) 

TQS 8.70 7.91 H-bonds (avg quality) 5 (0.67) 4 (0.78) Hydrophobic contacts (avg) 7 (0.76) 6 (0.80) Burial ratio 56.8% 43.2% Binding mode quality 0.45 0.35 Strain (kcal/mol) 55.08 67.71 Steric clashes 0 1Polar penalty 0.50 1.00 Ligand efficiency 0.389 0.361 Table 9: Metric comparison for the agent’s selected pose (pose_01) and the ground-truth best pose (pose_03) in system 4JFL. Both poses are classified as PARTIAL _POCKET . pose_01 leads on most metrics; pose_03 has superior hydrogen-bond geometry. 

Explicit rejection and reasoning divergence. The agent’s reasoning trace reveals the exact point of divergence. After evaluating all 20 poses, it compared pose_01 and pose_03 on each metric axis and concluded: 

“[pose_03 has] lower burial (43.2% vs 56.8% for pose_01), higher strain (67.71 kcal/mol, worse by 

∼12.6 kcal/mol), higher polar penalty (1.00 vs 0.50), and 1 minor clash. [. . . ] The much higher strain and worse burial/polar profile outweighed its slightly superior H-bond geometry. pose_01 remains preferable.” 

The agent acknowledged pose_03’s excellent hydrogen-bond geometry (average quality 0.78 vs. 0.67) but assigned insufficient weight to this advantage. Under the agent’s weighting scheme (interaction quality 35%, binding mode and burial 25%, strain 20%, polar penalty 15%, clashes 5%), the metrics favouring pose_01, higher TQS, deeper burial, lower strain, and fewer clashes, collectively outweighed the single metric favouring pose_03 (H-bond geometry). This is, in part, a genuine trade-off: the agent applied its weighting scheme consistently. Yet three structural observations suggest that the trade-off is less clear-cut than the metric table implies. First, the 13.6-percentage-point gap in burial ratio (56.8% vs. 43.2%) overstates the actual difference in pocket engagement. The SASA data show that pose_03 has a lower total solvent-accessible surface area (182.4 Å 2 vs. 194.1 Å 2) and a lower average SASA per atom (4.93 Å 2 vs. 5.25 Å 2) than pose_01; the burial ratio reverses because it applies a binary 1.0 Å 2 threshold, so five atoms that fall just above the cutoff in pose_03 count as “exposed” while the corresponding atoms in pose_01 fall just below it and count as “buried.” This sensitivity to the threshold is a known limitation of the current SASA implementation (Section 3.2.2), which does not decompose protein-contributed burial from intramolecular self-occlusion. Visual inspection of the two poses confirms that they occupy the pocket similarly (Figure 8a); the RMSD difference between them (3.27 Å vs. 1.76 Å) concentrates in the solvent-exposed tail of the ligand rather than in the binding-site core. Second, the 4JFL crystal structure contains ordered water molecules that mediate hydrogen bonds between the ligand and the protein (Figure 8b). The pipeline’s polar penalty tool evaluates only direct protein–ligand contacts within 3.5 Å (Section 3.2.5) and does not credit water-mediated satisfaction of buried polar atoms. Visual inspection of the X-ray structure confirms that at least some of pose_03’s nominally unsatisfied polar atoms are in fact satisfied through crystallographic water bridges, so its true polar penalty is lower than reported, narrowing the gap with pose_01 on this axis as well. Third, the agent’s weighting scheme undervalues H-bond geometry quality relative to burial ratio when no pose achieves DEEP _POCKET status. Increasing the weight of H-bond geometry in shallow-site ensembles would address this component of the failure. These three factors, an artifact-inflated burial ratio, an unmodelled water-mediated interaction network, and a weighting heuristic biased toward burial depth, converge to explain the 4JFL failure more completely than any single cause. 38 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

> (a) Close-up of the region where the agent’s selected pose_01 (orange; RMSD 3.27 Å) and the correct pose_03 (green; RMSD 1.76 Å) diverge. Both poses occupy the binding-site core simi-larly; the displacement concentrates in the solvent-exposed tail of the molecule.
> (b) Crystallographic water molecules in the 4JFL binding site mediate hydrogen bonds between the ligand and protein that the pipeline’s polar penalty tool does not credit, contributing to pose_03’s artificially elevated polar penalty.

Figure 8: Structural details for system 4JFL illustrating two of the three factors behind the agent’s incorrect selection. (a) The RMSD displacement between the two poses concentrates in the solvent-exposed tail rather than in the binding-site core. (b) Ordered crystallographic water molecules near the ligand mediate hydrogen bonds that the pipeline’s polar penalty tool cannot account for. The crystallographic ligand is shown in grey in both panels. 

Ensemble diagnosis and quality-over-quantity framework. Beyond the final metric comparisons, the chain-of-thought trace reveals a deliberative process in which the agent first diagnosed the ensemble’s distributional properties before applying any ranking logic. Having characterised the ensemble, the agent adapted its evaluation strategy to its specific characteristics: 

“pose_02 has the highest burial but weaker interaction quality. I think the scoring should weigh interaction quality heavily, along with binding mode classification and strain. It’s essential to highlight that this dataset primarily consists of partial_pocket modes.” 

This passage is noteworthy because the agent explicitly recognised that, in the absence of any DEEP _POCKET pose, interaction quality must serve as the primary discriminator rather than burial depth. The agent also identified internal counterexamples that stress-tested this framework: “Notably, pose_15 has the best strain and polar penalty but a low interaction quality of 2.70 with only five total interactions. [. . . ] Interesting trade-offs are at play here.” By flagging pose_15 as a case where favourable strain ( ∼49 kcal/mol) and zero polar penalty coincided with poor interaction quality (TQS of 2.70), the agent rehearsed the multi-dimensional trade-off logic it would later apply to the critical pose_01 vs. pose_03 comparison. The culmination of this deliberative arc was a self-labelled decision philosophy, “In the quality-over-quantity framework, pose_01’s interaction geometry and network coherence decisively beat alternatives” , a framework that, while internally consistent, ultimately led to the incorrect selection. 

Cross-metric insights and metric dominance hierarchy. The agent’s ensemble-level observations further reveal its capacity for cross-metric reasoning that extends beyond pairwise pose comparisons. Commenting on the relationship between polar satisfaction and interaction richness across all 20 poses, it noted: “Polar penalties range from excellent (pose_15, 0.00) to concerning (pose_08, 2.00), but poses with zero polar penalty tended to have weak interactions/poor quality.” This anti-correlation reflects a pharmacologically meaningful pattern: poses that form extensive contacts with the protein interior are precisely those most likely to bury unsatisfied polar atoms, whereas surface-exposed poses trivially satisfy all polar groups by remaining solvent-accessible. The agent’s acknowledgement of this trade-off demonstrates genuine ensemble-level reasoning rather than purely local comparisons. When arbitrating among its top candidates, the agent codified a clear metric dominance hierarchy. On the role of conformational strain, it stated: 

“Strain was used as a tie-breaker among strong interaction networks because all poses show unusually high strain; large absolute differences (e.g., 55 vs 68 kcal/mol) were considered, but strain alone could not overcome clearly superior interaction quality plus better burial.” 

39 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses It further quantified the energetic basis for its polar penalty treatment, “Polar penalties were factored to penalize buried unsatisfied polars ( ∼2–3 kcal/mol per atom) but given less weight than primary interaction quality” , and articulated a principled stance on the burial vs. interaction trade-off exemplified by pose_02: “Interaction quality is weighted more than burial when both are in acceptable ranges. The interaction deficit (both in count and quality) and higher polar penalty keep pose_02 behind pose_01 despite its superior burial.” The explicit subordination of strain and burial to interaction quality when both remain within acceptable ranges reveals a coherent decision architecture, one in which each metric occupies a defined role rather than contributing interchangeably, even though this hierarchy led to an incorrect selection for this particular system. 

Confidence assessment and constructive failure. Perhaps most strikingly, the agent’s confidence assessment section reveals an unusual degree of epistemic self-awareness for an automated system. It assigned only “Medium” confidence to its selection and articulated specific reasons: 

“All poses show very high conformational strain (49–81 kcal/mol). This raises concern about the docking protocol or protonation/tautomeric states. Strain limits absolute confidence.” 

The agent further proposed two alternative hypotheses for the absence of deeply buried poses: “No DEEP_POCKET binders (>70% burial) were observed; several are SURFACE. The binding site may be shallow, or docking constraints may have led to surface-biased solutions.” It also identified a methodological limitation of its own tool suite, “Water networks and protein side-chain repositioning were not exhaustively modeled; marginal differences among top poses could change with explicit solvent/side-chain repacking” , thereby acknowledging that the static, implicit-solvent analysis underpinning its ranking may not capture solvation effects that could reorder top-tier candidates. Finally, the agent proposed a concrete protocol-level intervention: “Consider re-running docking with alternative parameters or a different pocket definition if experimental evidence suggests a deeper site. The uniformly high strain numbers are a red flag; refinement or re-docking is warranted.” This cascade, from flagging systemic anomalies, through generating alternative hypotheses, to recommending protocol modifications, transforms what would otherwise be an uninformative wrong answer into a constructive diagnostic report. The 4JFL failure thus illustrates a key property of the agentic approach: even when the system arrives at the wrong answer, it makes its reasoning fully traceable, providing not only a complete account of its reasoning but also identifying the conditions under which its confidence is limited and what protocol-level changes might improve the outcome. This case demonstrates that transparent failure can be more valuable than opaque success: by providing a complete decision trace, the agent identifies the precise weighting limitation, insufficient emphasis on H-bond geometry in shallow binding sites, that a future system-prompt revision can target directly. Across the four case studies, several cross-cutting patterns emerge. First, the binding mode classification tool acted as an effective gating filter in 2P16, eliminating 9 of 20 surface artifacts that would otherwise have confounded the ranking. Second, the 3HS4 regression reveals a ceiling on what computed metrics can achieve: when the correct binding mode lacks favourable computed properties relative to a competitor, no weighting scheme applied to the current tool outputs will recover it. Third, the conformational strain tool proved decisive in 3OXC, where a 20 kcal/mol strain differential correctly tipped the ranking in favour of the near-native pose that Smina had missed, the strongest evidence for the multi-metric thesis. Fourth, the 4JFL failure traces to three converging factors: a burial ratio inflated by the binary SASA threshold, unmodelled water-mediated hydrogen bonds that artificially penalise the correct pose, and a weighting heuristic that undervalues H-bond geometry in shallow binding sites. Each factor is independently actionable. A second cross-cutting observation concerns adaptive weighting. In every system, the agent tailored its metric weights to the ensemble’s distributional properties rather than applying a fixed formula: pocket engagement dominated in surface-rich ensembles (2P16, 45% combined weight), interaction quality dominated in uniformly well-docked ensembles (3OXC, 35%), and clashes and strain were weighted equally when absolute strain values were uninformative (3HS4, both 12%). This context-dependent deployment of the same tool suite, sometimes as a hard gate, sometimes as a fine-grained discriminator, distinguishes the agentic approach from fixed-weight rescoring schemes. A third pattern is the agent’s consistent self-critical behaviour. In all four systems, the agent attributed elevated strain values to MMFF94 force-field limitations, recommended relative rather than absolute interpretation, and proposed concrete follow-up protocols (restrained minimisation of the protein-ligand complex with side-chain repacking, explicit hydration, or re-docking with alternative parameters). These epistemic disclaimers and experimental suggestions transform each output from a bare ranking into a diagnostic report whose transparency is maintained regardless of whether the final answer is correct. These patterns are consistent with the aggregate accuracy contrast reported in Table 4: the high Acc + (80%) reflects the agent’s ability to preserve correct identifications through robust multi-metric reasoning (exemplified by 2P16), while the low Acc − (20%) reflects the tool-suite coverage ceiling exposed by 3HS4 and the weighting limitation exposed by 40 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 4JFL. The formal Decision Attribution Analysis in the following section (Section 3.7.7) quantifies these patterns across all ten systems. 

4.6 Decision Attribution Analysis 

Having established what the agent decided in the preceding sections, we now analyse why it decided that way using the three-part attribution framework defined in Section 3.7.7. For each system the agent produces a pose selection together with self-reported percentage weights and a free-text chain-of-thought. The analyses below exploit both the structured weights and the objective per-pose metric values to assess which tools drove each selection, whether the agent’s stated reasoning faithfully reflects the underlying metric evidence, and whether weight-allocation patterns differ systematically between correct and incorrect decisions. 

Metric separation. Figure 9 reports the metric separation δi,t (Equation 17) for each system–tool combination as a colour-coded heatmap, with per-partition means in the bottom rows. Panel (a) shows the separations computed for the agent-selected pose; panel (b) shows the same metric for the ground-truth (lowest-RMSD) pose. For the five correctly identified systems the two panels are identical; differences appear only in the five failure cases. Positive values indicate that the target pose is more favourable than the candidate-pool mean on that metric; negative values indicate a less favourable selection. 

Figure 9: Metric separation ( δi,t ; Equation 17) for each system (rows) and tool category (columns). Panel (a): agent-selected pose; panel (b): ground-truth (lowest-RMSD) pose. The two panels are identical for correctly identified systems and differ only for failure cases. Red cells indicate that the target pose is more favourable than the candidate-pool mean; blue cells indicate a less favourable selection. Per-partition means appear below the second black line. Two tool categories, interaction quality (IQ) and binding mode/burial (BM/B), show positive separations in the large majority of systems (9/10 and 9/10, respectively), indicating that the agent almost universally selects poses that score above the candidate-pool mean on these dimensions. The two exceptions, 2P16, where the selected pose has a near-zero IQ separation ( δ = −0.10 ), and 185L, where burial is below the pool mean ( δ = −1.12 ), are cases where the agent prioritised other decisive metrics (binding mode gating and interaction quality, respectively). The mean IQ separation is higher for incorrect selections ( ¯δ = +1 .90 ) than for correct ones ( ¯δ = +1 .21 ), suggesting that incorrect decisions tend to be driven by an exceptional TQS advantage, a high interaction quality score alone is not sufficient to guarantee a correct choice. The most discriminating tool category is conformational strain . Correctly identified systems exhibit a mean strain separation of +0 .87 (the selected pose is nearly one standard deviation below the pool mean in strain energy), whereas incorrectly identified systems average only +0 .13 . Two failure cases illustrate the extremes: in 4MLT the selected pose has a markedly unfavourable strain separation ( δ = −2.18 , meaning the selected pose is strained relative to the pool), while in 2HA6 the strain dimension provided essentially no discriminative signal ( δ = +0 .09 ). These patterns align 41 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses with the qualitative observations from the Representative System Analysis (Section 4.5) and suggest that strain-based filtering is the principal determinant of decision correctness. Steric clashes and polar penalty exhibit near-zero mean separations (clash: −0.53 and −0.14 for correct and incorrect, respectively; polar: +0 .32 and +0 .20 ), with individual systems showing large excursions in both directions. The polar penalty tool produces |δ| < 0.3 in four of ten systems, indicating that it rarely differentiates the selected pose from the pool. The clash metric is dominated by scale effects in systems where most poses register zero clashes: a single pose with even a small clash severity value produces an extreme z-score (e.g., 2P16: δ = −3.42 ), making cross-system comparison of this metric less informative than the others. Comparing panels (a) and (b) for the five failure cases reveals why the agent errs. The ground-truth poses in these systems are metric-indistinguishable from the candidate pool on the two dimensions the agent weights most heavily: mean IQ separation is −0.17 and mean BM/B separation is −0.25 , both effectively at or below the pool average. By contrast, the agent-selected poses in the same systems show strong positive separations on both dimensions (mean IQ 

= +1 .90 , BM/B = +1 .36 ). The correct pose simply does not stand out on interaction quality or burial, so a selection strategy that prioritises these metrics will systematically miss it. Strain separation tells the opposite story: ground-truth poses in failure cases average +0 .18 , comparable to the +0 .13 of agent-selected poses, confirming that neither pose is markedly strained and that strain alone cannot rescue the decision. One exception is 4JFL, where the ground-truth pose retains a high IQ separation ( +1 .73 ) yet the agent selected a different pose; the failure here traces to an unfavourable binding mode/burial score ( −0.36 ) on the correct pose, which the agent penalised despite favourable interaction quality. 

Reasoning faithfulness. Table 10 reports the Spearman rank correlation ρi (Equation 18) between each system’s self-reported weight vector and the absolute metric separation vector. 

System Outcome ρi p-value 

185L ✓ +0 .975 0.005 

1ERR ✓ +0 .975 0.005 

2HYY ✓ +0 .462 0.434 

2P16 ✓ −0.154 0.805 

3OXC ✓ +0 .800 0.104 

2HA6 × +0 .975 0.005 

3HS4 × +0 .866 0.058 

4JFL × +0 .900 0.037 

4MLT × −0.051 0.935 

4ZLS × +0 .359 0.553 

Median (all) +0 .833 —

Median (correct) +0 .800 —

Median (incorrect) +0 .866 —Table 10: Reasoning faithfulness per system, measured as the Spearman rank correlation ρi between the agent’s self-reported tool weights wi and the absolute metric separations |δi| (Equation 18). Higher ρi indicates that the agent assigns more weight to tools on which the selected pose genuinely stands out. The median faithfulness across all ten systems is ρ = +0 .83 , indicating that the agent’s self-reported weight rankings are substantially concordant with the objective metric-separation rankings. Six of ten systems reach ρ ≥ +0 .80 , and three achieve ρ = +0 .975 (the maximum attainable Spearman coefficient for T = 5 categories). These results indicate that the chain-of-thought reasoning is largely faithful: the agent assigns the most weight to tools on which the selected pose genuinely excels relative to the candidate pool. Two systems show weak or negative faithfulness: 2P16 ( ρ = −0.15 ) and 4MLT ( ρ = −0.05 ). In 2P16, the agent’s dominant weight was assigned to binding mode/burial (45%), which indeed produced the largest positive δ (+1 .72 ), but the second-highest weight (interaction quality, 30%) corresponded to a near-zero separation ( −0.10 ), depressing the overall rank correlation. In 4MLT, the near-uniform strain values across all 20 poses (range: 18 .78 –18 .81 kcal mol −1)resulted in an extreme strain δ (−2.18 ) driven entirely by tiny absolute differences, providing little genuine discriminative power. The agent assigned only 5% weight to strain, the lowest in the benchmark, suggesting some awareness of the metric’s limited informativeness, yet the formal ρi remains low because the absolute |δ| ranking is dominated by this inflated z-score. Descriptively, the median ρ is similar across the two outcome groups: +0 .80 for correct systems and +0 .87 for incorrect systems. A Mann–Whitney U test against these per-group rank distributions yields U = 13 .0, p = 1 .00 ; this result is reported descriptively because with n1 = n2 = 5 the test has minimal power to support either rejection or equivalence. 42 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses The reasoning alignment measured here is therefore compatible with either a shared alignment profile across outcomes or a modest difference that the present sample cannot resolve. Taken at face value, the similarity is consistent with the interpretation that incorrect decisions do not arise from a visible realignment between stated and observed weightings, the agent relies on the same ordering of metrics that it reports, but rather that the metric evidence itself is insufficient to discriminate the correct pose from high-scoring decoys. This descriptive measure does not, on its own, distinguish faithful introspection from internally coherent post-hoc rationalisation [27, 28]. Figure 10 visualises the per-system ρi values, confirming the absence of a systematic correct–incorrect separation. 

Figure 10: Reasoning faithfulness ( ρi; Equation 18) for each system, coloured by outcome (teal = correct, orange = incorrect). The dotted horizontal line marks the median across all systems ( ρ = +0 .83 ). Faithfulness is not systematically related to decision correctness. 

Outcome-stratified attribution. Table 11 compares the mean stated tool weights for correctly and incorrectly identified systems (Equation 19). 

Tool category ¯w ✓ 

> t

¯w × 

> t

∆

Interaction quality 36.0% 34.4% +1 .6

Binding mode / burial 30.0% 28.4% +1 .6

Conformational strain 16.0% 15.4% +0 .6

Steric clashes 8.0% 8.4% −0.4

Polar penalty 10.0% 13.4% −3.4

Table 11: Outcome-stratified mean tool weights (Equation 19). ¯w ✓ 

> t

and ¯w × 

> t

denote the mean weight assigned to tool category t across the five correct and five incorrect systems, respectively. ∆ is the difference (correct − incorrect). Figure 11 provides a visual comparison of the two weight profiles. The weight profiles for correct and incorrect decisions are strikingly similar: no tool category exhibits a mean difference exceeding |∆| = 3 .5 percentage points. The largest individual difference is a −3.4 percentage-point lower allocation to polar penalty in correct systems ( ¯w ✓ = 10 .0% ) than in incorrect ones ( ¯w × = 13 .4% ), but this is within the expected variability for m = 5 systems per group. The interaction quality and binding mode/burial categories jointly receive approximately 63–66% of the total weight in both groups, confirming that the agent treats these as the primary decision drivers regardless of the outcome. The near-identical weight profiles, combined with the faithful reasoning demonstrated in Analysis 2, lead to a key insight: the agent’s failure mode is not a misallocation of attention across tool categories. Rather, incorrect decisions arise when the metric evidence itself, particularly the strain dimension, fails to separate the correct pose from high-scoring decoys. This directs future improvement efforts toward enhancing individual tool outputs (e.g., more accurate force fields, additional binding-quality indicators) rather than toward prompt engineering of the agent’s weighting strategy. 43 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Figure 11: Outcome-stratified tool weight comparison (Equation 19). Each pair of bars shows the mean self-reported weight for correctly identified systems (teal) and incorrectly identified systems (orange). Weight profiles are remarkably similar, indicating that the failure mode lies in the tool-suite’s discriminative power rather than in the agent’s attention allocation. 

4.7 Supplementary Analyses Confidence Calibration. Each output report includes a self-reported confidence level, Medium , Medium-High , or 

High , reflecting the agent’s assessment of its own certainty. Across the ten benchmark systems, the agent assigned High confidence to four systems (185L, 1ERR, 3HS4, 4MLT), of which only two were correct (50% accuracy). Medium-confidence systems (2HYY, 2P16, 3OXC, 4JFL) achieved 75% accuracy (3/4 correct), while the two Medium-High systems (2HA6, 4ZLS) were both incorrect. A Fisher exact test of the two-by-two table (High versus non-High confidence, correct versus incorrect) returns OR = 1.00, p = 1.000; this is reported descriptively, because at n = 10 

systems the test has insufficient power to support a confident statement either way. Taken descriptively, the high-confidence subset reached 50% accuracy and the medium-confidence subset 75%, an ordering opposite to the one that empirical calibration would predict. We therefore refrain from concluding that the self-reported confidence score is uncalibrated; we note instead that calibration cannot be assessed at this sample size and that the observed ordering warrants larger-scale evaluation (Figure 12). 

Figure 12: Confidence calibration. Bars show the number of correct (green) and incorrect (orange) systems at each self-reported confidence level. The descriptive ordering (high-confidence 50% accuracy, medium-confidence 75%) is opposite to what empirical calibration would predict, but cannot be resolved inferentially at n = 10 (Fisher exact test, 

p = 1 .000 ; reported descriptively). 44 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Ground-Truth Pose Metric Profile. To understand where correct ground-truth poses sit in metric space relative to their ensembles, we computed the signed z-score of each ground-truth pose’s five tool-derived metrics within its ensemble, defining positive direction as favourable (higher IQ and BM/B; lower CS, SC, and UP). In the five correct systems, the ground-truth pose exhibits consistently favourable metric separation: mean signed z-scores are +1 .21 

(IQ), +0 .99 (BM/B), and +0 .87 (CS), indicating that these ground-truth poses genuinely stand out as ensemble-best across multiple tools. By contrast, in the five incorrect systems the ground-truth pose is metric-indistinguishable from the ensemble mean (IQ z = −0.17 , BM/B z = −0.25 , CS z = +0 .18 ), offering the agent no physics-based signal to favour the native-like geometry. This result suggests that failures are concentrated in systems where the ground-truth pose has no metric advantage, making correct selection fundamentally harder with the current tool suite. 

Top-k Relaxed Accuracy. The comparative analysis section of each report implicitly ranks poses by decreasing preference. A structural caveat conditions the interpretation of this analysis: the system prompt instructs the agent to emit a short ranked shortlist (typically the top four to five poses) rather than a complete ordering of the ensemble, whereas Smina produces an affinity score for every pose and therefore a full ranking. The agent’s top-k curve therefore plateaus where its emitted shortlist ends (a configuration choice) and not at a ceiling of its underlying ranking ability. Head-to-head comparison between agent and Smina top-k accuracies is meaningful only at matched ranks k ≤ 3, which is the depth covered by every run in the benchmark. Relaxing the success criterion from top-1 to top-k reveals a sharp improvement from k = 1 to k = 3 : accuracy rises from 50% (5/10) at k = 1 , to 60% (6/10) at k = 2 when 4MLT’s ground truth (pose_07) enters the shortlist, and 70% (7/10) at k = 3 when 4JFL’s ground truth (pose_03) is included. No further gains occur at k = 4 or k = 5 : the three remaining failures (2HA6, 3HS4, 4ZLS) have ground-truth poses that were never emitted in the agent’s shortlist. Smina’s affinity-based ranking follows the same trajectory through 

k = 3 (50%, 60%, 70%), though the systems recovered at k = 2 differ: the agent recovers 4MLT while Smina recovers 3OXC. Beyond k = 5 , Smina continues to accumulate correct systems, reaching 80% at k = 7 (4MLT), 90% at k = 19 

(2HA6), and 100% at k = 20 (4ZLS), because it produces a complete ranking over all docked conformations; the agent does not, so its top-k ceiling at 70% reflects the truncated-emission configuration rather than a limit on its ability to rank the remaining poses had it been prompted to do so. Both methods substantially exceed the random-selection baseline (7.7% at k = 1 , 38.7% at k = 5 ) at every k within the agent’s ranking depth, confirming that both rankings carry meaningful signal even when the top-1 pick is incorrect (Figure 13). 

Figure 13: Top-k relaxed accuracy. The agent’s accuracy (circles, solid line) rises from 50% at k = 1 to 70% at k = 3 

and then plateaus; the plateau is a configuration artefact caused by the prompt instructing the agent to emit a short ranked shortlist (typically four to five poses) rather than a full ordering, not a property of its underlying ranking ability. Smina’s affinity-based ranking (triangles, solid line) matches the agent through k = 3 and then continues to 100% at 

k = 20 because it ranks every docked conformation. Head-to-head comparison is therefore meaningful only at matched ranks k ≤ 3. The random-selection baseline (squares, dashed line) grows as k/ ¯nposes .

Single-Metric Accuracy Baselines. To quantify the added value of multi-metric integration, we tested five naïve baselines that each select the pose optimising a single tool (highest IQ, highest BM/B, lowest CS, lowest SC, or lowest UP). No single-metric strategy exceeds 30% accuracy: IQ-only, BM/B-only, and SC-only each achieve 30% (3/10), UP-only achieves 20% (2/10), and CS-only achieves only 10% (1/10). A majority-vote baseline, selecting whichever pose wins the most individual metrics, also reaches only 30% (3/10), because pose-level metric rankings often conflict. 45 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses The agent’s 50% accuracy therefore represents a meaningful improvement over any single-metric heuristic, consistent with the interpretation that the LLM reasoning layer integrates complementary signals from heterogeneous tools. 

Weight Variability Across Systems. Figure 14 visualises the distribution of self-reported weights across all ten systems for each tool category. Interaction Quality is the most stable weight (mean 35 .2±3.9%, CV = 10.9%), reflecting its consistent primacy in the agent’s reasoning. Binding-Mode/Burial is the next most stable (mean 29 .2 ± 7.4%, CV = 25.5%) but shows the widest absolute range (20–45%), driven by 2P16 where the agent up-weighted burial to 45% due to the ligand’s shallow-pocket binding landscape. The three penalty-oriented tools—Strain, Clashes, and Polar—exhibit higher relative variability (CV = 33.8–44.8%), consistent with their context-dependent role as tiebreakers rather than primary drivers. Notably, the distribution of weights does not differ systematically between correct and incorrect systems within any tool category. 

Figure 14: Distribution of self-reported tool weights across ten systems. Box plots show the median and interquartile range; individual points are coloured by selection outcome (green = correct, orange = incorrect). IQ receives the most consistent weighting; penalty tools show higher relative variability. 

Ensemble Difficulty and Performance. To probe whether ensemble-level properties track selection difficulty, we computed two complexity proxies for each system: ensemble size ( nposes ) and the coefficient of variation (CV) of Interaction Quality scores across all poses. Both proxies covary negatively with correctness in the descriptive sense. Correct systems have a mean ensemble size of 12.4 poses versus 20.0 for incorrect systems (point-biserial r = −0.668 ), and a mean TQS CV of 20.1% versus 35.7% ( r = −0.739 ). The nominal p-values for these correlations ( p = 0 .035 

and p = 0 .015 , uncorrected) are reported descriptively and should be interpreted as exploratory: with n = 10 systems and multiple candidate descriptors examined, no correction for multiple comparisons is applied, and neither correlation supports an inferential claim. Larger ensembles mechanically increase the search space, while higher TQS variability may reflect more degenerate binding landscapes where multiple poses present plausible interaction profiles. These tentative associations motivate follow-up evaluation at larger scale, where ensemble size and metric heterogeneity could be assessed as difficulty indicators for confidence-aware selection strategies. 

Chain-of-Thought Depth. We quantified the depth of the agent’s reasoning by measuring the word count of the Chain-of-Thought section preceding each final report. The mean Chain-of-Thought comprised 873 ± 101 words across the ten systems (range: 699–1027). Correct systems tended to elicit slightly longer chains ( 923 ± 91 words) than incorrect systems ( 824 ± 92 words), though this difference did not reach significance (Mann-Whitney U = 21 .0,

p = 0 .095 ). More strikingly, when normalised by ensemble size, correct systems received 99 .1 ± 65 .2 words per pose versus 41 .2 ± 4.6 for incorrect systems, suggesting that the agent allocates disproportionately more reasoning effort per pose in smaller, ultimately easier ensembles. Neither raw word count nor confidence level correlated significantly with Chain-of-Thought length (Spearman ρ = −0.494 , p = 0 .147 for nposes and ρ = −0.156 , p = 0 .668 for confidence), indicating that reasoning verbosity is relatively stable regardless of the ensemble complexity or the agent’s stated certainty. 46 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

# 5 Discussion 

5.1 The Value of Multi-Metric Decomposition over Composite Scoring Single-metric insufficiency. The single-metric accuracy baselines reported in Section 4.7 reveal that no individual physicochemical criterion is sufficient for near-native pose identification. Selecting the pose that optimises a single tool (highest interaction quality, deepest burial, lowest strain, fewest clashes, or fewest unsatisfied polar atoms) never exceeds 30% accuracy, and conformational strain alone achieves only 10%. A majority-vote heuristic that selects whichever pose wins the plurality of individual metrics also caps at 30%, because pose-level rankings across tools frequently conflict: a deeply buried pose may harbour steric clashes, and the candidate with the richest hydrogen-bond network may adopt an energetically strained conformation. The agent’s 50% accuracy (Section 4.2) therefore cannot be replicated by any single-metric shortcut or their naïve combination; it requires the kind of cross-metric integration that explicit reasoning over decomposed observables enables. This finding echoes a longstanding theme in scoring-function research [ 4, 8]: the physics of protein–ligand binding is intrinsically multi-dimensional, and collapsing competing contributions (van der Waals contacts, electrostatic complementarity, desolvation penalties, conformational strain) into a single composite score inevitably discards the trade-off information needed to adjudicate between closely ranked poses. Where traditional scoring functions address this dimensionality reduction through fixed-weight summation or consensus protocols [ 18 , 19 ], the agentic approach preserves each observable as a separate input to an explicit reasoning process, allowing the relative importance of each criterion to vary with the physicochemical context of the ensemble under evaluation. 

Context-dependent tool deployment. The representative system analyses (Section 4.5) illustrate how the agent reconfigures its evaluation strategy in response to each ensemble’s distributional properties. In 2P16, where 9 of 20 poses were classified as surface binders, the agent allocated 45% of its composite weight to pocket engagement (25% binding mode, 20% burial), effectively deploying binding mode as a hard gate that eliminated nearly half the candidate pool before interaction quality was assessed. In 3HS4, by contrast, 17 of 20 poses occupied the deep-pocket category, leaving the binding mode classifier with negligible discriminatory power; the agent responded by shifting emphasis to interaction quality and elevating clashes and polar penalties above strain (both 12%), which better separated the remaining candidates. In 3OXC, all top-ranked poses were deeply buried and presented similar interaction profiles (TQS 16.81 vs. 17.56), so the agent promoted conformational strain to a decisive tiebreaker, judging a 20 kcal/mol strain differential too large to overlook despite a marginal quality-score disadvantage. A fixed-weight rescoring function, by definition, applies the same coefficient vector to every ensemble regardless of its composition; the agentic approach adapts the weighting hierarchy to the ensemble at hand (gate, discriminator, or tiebreaker) according to which criterion carries the most information in each context. The weight variability analysis (Figure 14) corroborates this pattern quantitatively: interaction quality is the most stable weight across the ten systems (mean 35 .2 ± 3.9%, CV = 10.9%), reflecting its consistent primacy, whereas the three penalty-oriented tools (strain, clashes, and unsatisfied polar atoms) exhibit substantially higher variability (CV = 33.8–44.8%), consistent with their context-dependent role as tiebreakers rather than primary drivers. The variability itself is therefore a feature of the architecture, not noise: it reflects principled adaptation of the decision hierarchy to the physicochemical landscape of each pose ensemble. 

Conformational strain as both the strongest discriminator and the principal failure bottleneck. The metric separation analysis (Figure 9) identifies conformational strain as the most outcome-sensitive tool in the benchmark, but its influence is double-edged. Correctly identified systems exhibit a mean strain separation of δ = +0 .87 , the selected pose lies nearly one standard deviation below the ensemble mean in strain energy, whereas incorrectly identified systems average only δ = +0 .13 . When genuine strain differentiation exists, as in 3OXC, where a 20 kcal/mol differential was large enough to override a marginal interaction-quality disadvantage, strain drives the agent toward the correct answer. When it does not, strain becomes the principal failure bottleneck: in 4MLT the near-uniform strain landscape across all 20 poses ( 18 .78 –18 .81 kcal mol −1) inflated the z-score of a negligible absolute difference into a markedly unfavourable separation ( δ = −2.18 ), while in 2HA6 the strain dimension provided essentially no discriminative signal (δ = +0 .09 ). The Decision Attribution Analysis (Section 4.6) reinforces this duality: the agent’s failure mode is not a misallocation of attention across tool categories, but arises specifically when the strain evidence fails to separate the correct pose from high-scoring decoys. Conformational strain is therefore both the strongest single predictor of success and the dimension whose absence of signal most reliably predicts failure. This pattern is consistent with the broader literature on ligand strain: crystallographic surveys indicate that most protein-bound ligands tolerate only moderate conformational penalties (<5 kcal/mol for ∼60% of complexes) [ 46 ], and strain-based filtering has been shown to improve enrichment in large-library docking campaigns [ 11 ]. A caveat is warranted: absolute MMFF94 strain energies across our benchmark systems are systematically elevated (44–97 kcal/mol), suggesting force-field artefacts that inflate the raw values (Section 5.7). The agent identified this pattern in every representative system and adopted a relative 47 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses rather than absolute interpretation of strain, a methodologically sound response that a rigid scoring function, operating on the same inflated energies, could not execute. 

The 3OXC recovery: anatomy of a successful scoring-function override. The 3OXC system, the sole Category C case in the partition-stratified analysis (Table 4), provides the clearest illustration of how decomposed multi-metric evaluation can recover a near-native pose that a composite scoring function misses. Smina ranked the near-native conformation (pose_02, RMSD = 0 .63 Å) second by affinity, yet the agent correctly identified it from a pool of 19 candidates (Section 4.5). The decision turned on two reasoning steps that a single composite score cannot express. First, having established that the principal competitor, pose_06, held marginal advantages in interaction quality (TQS 17.56 vs 16.81) and burial (83.6% vs 80.0%), the agent explicitly weighed these gains against a 20 kcal mol −1

conformational-strain penalty (46.06 vs 66.42 kcal mol −1) and concluded that “the strain disadvantage is too large to ignore” (Table 8). Second, the agent discounted salt-bridge contacts reported at distances exceeding 5 Å as geometrically implausible, a critical evaluation of its own tool outputs that prevented an inflated interaction score from biasing the ranking. Together, these judgements illustrate the core mechanism the framework was designed to enable: individual physical contributions remain visible and separately evaluable, so that a dominant penalty in one dimension can override marginal advantages in others. This recovery must, however, be interpreted with appropriate restraint: 3OXC is the only successful override among five scoring-function failures (Acc − = 20 .0% , 1/5; Section 4.4), with the remaining four Smina-failure systems falling into Category D. Although a 20% recovery rate substantially exceeds the random baseline of 5.1%, it falls far short of what routine deployment would require; the result therefore constitutes a proof of principle, decomposed evaluation can recover poses missed by composite ranking, rather than a claim of systematic superiority. 

5.2 Diagnosing the Failure Mode: Tool-Suite Coverage, Not Reasoning Quality Ground-truth poses in failure systems are metric-indistinguishable from their ensembles. The ground-truth pose metric profile analysis (Section 4.7) provides the sharpest diagnostic for understanding why the agent fails. In the five correctly identified systems, the ground-truth conformation exhibits consistently favourable z-scores across the three primary observables: +1 .21 (interaction quality), +0 .99 (binding mode/burial), and +0 .87 (conformational strain), the native-like geometry genuinely stands out from its ensemble on every dimension the tool suite evaluates. In the five incorrect systems, by contrast, the ground-truth pose is metric-indistinguishable from the ensemble mean (IQ z = −0.17 ,BM/B z = −0.25 , CS z = +0 .18 ), offering no physics-based signal that any weighting of the current tools could exploit. The 3HS4 regression, the sole Category B case (Table 4), illustrates this ceiling most starkly: the correct pose (pose_01, RMSD = 0 .96 Å) scored a TQS of only 3.23, exhibited 75.0% burial, and carried two steric clashes, whereas the agent’s selection (pose_02) achieved a TQS of 6.52, 93.8% burial, and zero clashes (Table 6). Under any reasonable weighting of these observables, pose_02 would be preferred; the ground-truth conformation did not even appear in the agent’s top-seven ranking, because its modest interaction profile placed it below the attention threshold. This pattern establishes a fundamental performance ceiling: the framework cannot outperform the collective discriminative power of its tool suite. When the native-like pose offers no metric advantage over competing conformations, no reweighting of the current observables can recover it; the bottleneck lies upstream of the reasoning layer, in the evidence on which that reasoning acts. 

Alignment between stated weights and observed metric separations. The faithfulness analysis reinforces this diagnosis. The median per-system Spearman rank correlation between the agent’s self-reported weight vectors and the objective metric separations of the selected pose is ρ = +0 .83 (Table 10), indicating substantial concordance between stated reasoning priorities and the quantitative evidence that accompanies them. An interpretive caveat is warranted: this correlation measures alignment between what the agent says it weighted and what the selected pose actually exhibits; it does not, on its own, distinguish faithful introspection from internally coherent post-hoc rationalisation, a failure mode documented for frontier models even in the presence of plausible chain-of-thought traces [ 27 , 28 ]. Descriptive comparison between the outcome groups is consistent with symmetry: the median ρ is +0 .80 for correctly identified systems and +0 .87 for incorrectly identified ones (Mann–Whitney U = 13 .0, p = 1 .00 ; reported descriptively, since with n1 = n2 = 5 the test has minimal power to support either rejection or equivalence). The outcome-stratified weight analysis (Table 11) corroborates this symmetry: the mean weight allocated to each tool category differs by at most 3.4 percentage points between the two groups, a margin well within the descriptive variability expected for partitions of five systems. The agent does not visibly reallocate attention across tool categories when it fails; it applies the same evaluation framework, with comparable emphasis on each physicochemical dimension, regardless of outcome. This combination (faithful reasoning, consistent attention allocation, yet divergent outcomes) localises the failure mode upstream of the reasoning layer, in the discriminative power of the input metrics themselves. The finding contrasts with the broader chain-of-thought faithfulness literature, where LLMs have been shown to produce plausible but fabricated rationalisations for bias-driven decisions [ 27 ] and to exhibit decreasing faithfulness with increasing model capability [ 28 ]. In the present application, where the evidence consists of structured numerical outputs presented under 48 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses explicit domain-specific interpretation guidelines, reasoning concordance is substantially higher, suggesting that the structured, tool-mediated architecture may itself act as a faithfulness safeguard, a design property with implications for AI-assisted scientific workflows beyond molecular docking. 

Implications for system improvement. The preceding diagnosis directs improvement efforts to three concrete, evidence-grounded targets. First, the tool suite requires expansion: the 3HS4 failure arose because the ground-truth binding mode is preferred for reasons the current observables capture only partially. Smina’s scoring-term decomposition (Table 7) pinpoints the gap: the sole term favouring pose_01 is non-directional hydrogen-bond proximity, a continuous polar complementarity measure that the agent’s tools lack. PLIP’s binary contact detection and the polar penalty’s deficit-only counting cannot represent this dimension, and its 0.87 kcal/mol contribution was overwhelmed by the agent’s interaction-plus-burial weighting (Section 4.5). Incorporating physics-based rescoring methods that model solvation explicitly, such as MM-GBSA [ 3] or free-energy perturbation, would introduce physical dimensions capable of separating poses that the present five tools treat as equivalent. Second, conformational strain, the strongest individual diagnostic for decision correctness (Section 5.1), is degraded by MMFF94 force-field artefacts that inflate absolute energies across all benchmark systems; adopting a higher-accuracy force field or performing explicit minimisation of the bound-state complex would sharpen the most informative discriminator the framework currently possesses (Section 5.7). Third, the 4JFL analysis identified three converging factors behind the failure: a burial ratio inflated by the binary SASA threshold (Section 3.2.2), unmodelled water-mediated hydrogen bonds that artificially penalise the correct pose (Table 9), and a weighting heuristic that undervalues H-bond geometry quality when no pose achieves deep-pocket classification. The first two factors require tool-suite improvements (a continuous burial metric and water-bridge-aware polar penalties); the third is directly addressable through system-prompt refinement. Importantly, the ability to trace each incorrect decision to a specific, actionable deficiency (in the tool suite, the force field, or the weighting heuristics) is itself a product of the decomposed, transparent architecture. A conventional scoring function that achieved the same overall accuracy would not reveal whether the bottleneck lies in the feature representation, the functional form, or the training data [ 4], and would therefore offer no roadmap for targeted improvement; diagnosability is thus a practical advantage of the framework independent of its numerical performance. 

5.3 Quality and Faithfulness of LLM Scientific Reasoning Adaptive weighting and thermodynamic commensuration. The adaptive weighting documented in Section 5.1, where the agent reconfigured its evaluation hierarchy from system to system, also bears on the quality of the underlying reasoning process. Beyond adjusting relative priorities, the representative system analyses (Section 4.5) reveal two behaviours that transcend simple metric comparison: approximate thermodynamic commensuration and explicit hypothesis revision. In the 3HS4 analysis, the agent estimated a cost of approximately 2–3 kcal/mol per buried unsatisfied polar atom and weighed this against a competing candidate’s interaction and burial superiority, concluding that the estimated 4–6 kcal/mol polar desolvation disadvantage was outweighed by gains on the primary axes (Table 6). Placing heterogeneous observables on an approximate common energy scale is a form of reasoning typically performed only by expert computational chemists during manual pose inspection [ 2]. The system prompt provides energy-scale heuristics, for example, an approximate 2–3 kcal/mol desolvation cost per buried unsatisfied polar atom and an “interaction compensation principle” allowing moderate strain when offset by strong binding, but the agent’s specific application, chaining these prompted values into a connected multi-step trade-off argument and arriving at a quantitative estimate of the net disadvantage, goes beyond what the instructions literally prescribe. The agent simultaneously maintained epistemic caution, noting that “it’s not helpful to equate TQS values directly to energy”, a self-imposed boundary between geometric surrogates and thermodynamic quantities. In the 3OXC recovery, a complementary pattern appeared: the agent explicitly quantified the inter-pose delta across multiple axes ( ∆ quality ∼+3.24; +4 total interactions) and used these simultaneous comparisons to construct a transparent justification for overriding the scoring-function ranking (Table 8). The 2P16 analysis further demonstrates hypothesis revision: the reasoning trace records an intermediate stage in which the agent favoured a different candidate before systematically applying the binding-mode filter and revising its selection (Table 5), iterative deliberation rather than a single scoring pass. Together, these behaviours (commensuration, cross-axis quantification, and hypothesis revision) suggest that LLMs, when provided with structured numerical evidence and domain-specific interpretation guidelines, can perform a form of multi-criterion scientific reasoning that goes beyond pattern matching. A caveat is warranted: the system prompt (Section 3.4) encodes much of the evaluation framework, and the extent to which the observed behaviour reflects genuine understanding versus pattern-following of prompt instructions cannot be resolved from these results alone [25]. 

Self-critical reasoning and tool-output anomaly detection. A complementary facet of the reasoning quality emerges from the agent’s treatment of its own tool limitations. The individual flagging episodes documented in the preceding subsections (MMFF94 force-field attribution across all four representative systems (Section 5.1), salt-bridge geometry filtering in 3OXC, and identification of unmodelled water networks in 3HS4 (Section 5.2)) are instances of a systematic 49 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses self-critical pattern confirmed in the cross-system summary (Section 4.5). Each episode follows a common structure: the agent detects a systematic anomaly in a tool’s output, attributes it to a specific methodological cause, recommends an adjusted interpretation strategy, and proposes a concrete follow-up, mutagenesis and footprinting in 2P16, explicit hydration and pKa refinement in 3HS4, re-docking with alternative pocket definitions in 4JFL. In the last of these cases, the self-critical reasoning extended beyond force-field artefacts to the upstream docking protocol itself: the agent proposed that the absence of any deeply buried conformation might reflect sampling bias or pocket mis-definition rather than the ligand’s true binding mode (Table 9), a hypothesis that shifts responsibility from the ranking step to the pose-generation step. Collectively, these behaviours transform each output from a bare ranking into a structured diagnostic report that delivers not only a pose selection but also the reasoning behind it, the conditions under which it may be unreliable, and a roadmap for strengthening the evidence base. This diagnostic richness is preserved regardless of whether the final selection is correct: the 3HS4 and 4JFL traces, despite producing incorrect rankings, correctly identified the factors most likely to undermine the result (unmodelled solvation and sampling limitations, respectively) providing actionable guidance for targeted improvement. Whether this reasoning-level self-awareness translates into empirically calibrated confidence labels is examined in the following paragraph. 

Confidence calibration: a gap between self-assessment and empirical accuracy. The confidence calibration analysis (Section 4.7) shows that this granular self-awareness does not aggregate into a reliable summary signal at the present sample size. Of the four systems to which the agent assigned high confidence, only two were correctly identified (50% accuracy); medium-confidence systems achieved 75% (3/4 correct), while both medium-high systems were incorrect (Figure 12). Calibration cannot be assessed inferentially at n = 10 : a Fisher exact test of the high-versus-non-high confidence table returns OR = 1.00, p = 1.000, but with only ten systems and a 2 × 2 table the test has essentially no power to support either rejection or equivalence. Descriptively, the high-confidence subset achieved 50% accuracy and the medium-confidence subset 75%, an ordering opposite to what empirical calibration would predict, and warrants larger-scale evaluation rather than a definitive judgement on calibration from the present benchmark. The observation is qualitatively consistent with the broader literature on miscalibrated verbalised confidence in LLMs [ 51 ]. The 3HS4 regression sharpens this paradox: the agent assigned high confidence to its worst failure ( ∆RMSD = 4 .32 Å, the largest deviation in the benchmark; Table 3), precisely because the selected pose dominated on every metric the tool suite provides (Section 5.2). Simultaneously, the reasoning trace explicitly flagged force-field artefacts and unmodelled water networks as potential confounders, the very factors that explain the failure. The confidence label was thus well-calibrated to the metric evidence but not to the outcome, because the metric evidence was itself misleading. This dissociation between reasoning-level uncertainty, which identifies specific epistemic gaps, and the summary confidence label, which reflects only the agent’s assessment of its relative ranking given available metrics, reveals a structural limitation: the agent possesses no mechanism to translate articulated caveats into a quantitative discount on its overall confidence. For practical deployment, users cannot rely on the stated confidence level as a reliability indicator; an external calibration mechanism (such as ensemble-of-runs variance, metric-separation thresholds computed before the reasoning step, or a dedicated confidence-prediction model) would be needed to provide actionable confidence estimates, a limitation examined further in Section 5.7. 

Limitations of the LLM reasoning layer. The reasoning capabilities documented in the preceding paragraphs must be weighed against four inherent limitations of the LLM decision layer. First, the agent’s behaviour is governed by a 

∼7,800 -word system prompt (Section 3.4) that was iteratively refined during development; a dedicated anti-bias section, for instance, was added after early testing revealed a “more interactions = better” failure mode. This coupling between prompt phrasing and decision behaviour means that small modifications, such as the threshold at which conformational strain overrides interaction quality, could alter rankings in ways that have not been systematically characterised, because no formal ablation varying prompt components was conducted. Second, although the tool-mediated architecture grounds reasoning in pre-computed, deterministic outputs rather than parametric memory (Section 2.3), the hallucination risk is reduced but not eliminated: the model could in principle fabricate metric values or misattribute properties across poses. Architectural safeguards (mandatory identity verification, structured output sections, and character-for-character code copying (Section 3.4)) mitigate this risk, but no automated post-hoc mechanism currently confirms that every number in the reasoning trace matches the source analysis files. Third, all results were obtained with a single model (GPT-5, OpenAI Agents SDK version 0.5.0); performance may differ across providers or model versions, and silent weight updates by the provider could alter reasoning characteristics without warning, a reproducibility challenge common to API-dependent scientific workflows. Fourth, LLM inference is inherently stochastic, yet the evaluation employed a single run per system; inter-run variance in pose selection has not been quantified. These constraints are not unique to the present application but are shared by all LLM-based scientific agents [ 22 , 23 ]; they underscore the importance of treating the agent’s output as a structured recommendation for expert audit rather than as a definitive answer. Each limitation is examined in detail, together with partial mitigations afforded by the modular architecture, in Section 5.7. 50 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

5.4 Pose Anonymisation as a Design Choice Motivated by the Reasoning-Bias Literature Design rationale. The positional and label-based biases that systematically distort LLM ranking behaviour (Sec-tion 2.3) are especially consequential in molecular docking, where pose identifiers assigned by the docking engine conventionally encode the scoring-function ranking: pose_01 is the top-ranked conformation, so exposing these filenames to the model would conflate positional and content-based signals with the independent physicochemical evaluation. The deterministic SHA-256 anonymisation protocol described in Section 3.3 is a design-time intervention introduced to pre-empt this risk, motivated by the reasoning-bias literature cited above [ 29 , 30 , 31 ]. Three properties guided the design. Determinism ensures that the same system-pose pair always yields the same eight-character code, enabling reproducible audits across independent runs. SHA-256’s avalanche property guarantees that sequentially num-bered poses produce identifiers with no discernible ordinal pattern, so no ordinal cue from the docking engine’s naming convention reaches the model. The eight-character code length was empirically calibrated: full 36-character UUIDs increased the rate of transcription errors in early testing, whereas shorter codes preserved the character-for-character accuracy required for automatic de-anonymisation (Section 3.3). We do not claim an established methodological contri-bution. The protocol was motivated by qualitative observations during development (in pre-anonymisation runs, the model was observed referencing pose names as factors in its reasoning) but its magnitude of effect on ranking accuracy, faithfulness, or attribution has not been quantified, because no ablation comparing anonymised and non-anonymised runs was performed on the benchmark; we therefore present the protocol as a design choice whose effect size remains to be measured (Section 5.8). Moreover, while the SHA-256 hashing eliminates label-based cues, the current implementation presents analysis files in a fixed sorted order without shuffling, so positional bias remains an uncontrolled confound. The underlying principle, decoupling item identity from any quality-correlated naming signal before an LLM performs comparative evaluation, is straightforward to transpose to other LLM-based comparative-evaluation tasks (for example, scientific peer review or compound triaging), but we defer any such generalisation claim until the within-task effect size has been measured on this benchmark. 

5.5 Comparison to Related Work Classical rescoring and consensus approaches. The three scoring paradigms reviewed in Section 2.2 (empirical or physics-based rescoring, knowledge-based potentials, and consensus scoring) differ from the agentic framework in scope, computational cost, and output format. Physics-based rescoring with MM-GBSA or MM-PBSA [ 3] provides the most rigorous individual comparison, incorporating explicit solvation modelling and energy minimisation that the present tool suite does not replicate; however, the result remains a single composite free-energy estimate, and the additional computation, hours rather than minutes per system (Supplementary Section A.1), limits routine application to entire docking ensembles. Knowledge-based potentials such as DrugScore and PMF [ 13 , 14 ] achieve speed comparable to the agentic pipeline but collapse all atom-pair preferences into an opaque aggregate [ 8 ], offering no mechanism to reveal which physicochemical dimension drove the ranking. Classical consensus methods [ 18 , 19 , 20 ] partially address the single-function limitation by fusing rankings from multiple independent scorers, raising pose-prediction success rates from 66–76 % individually to approximately 80 % or higher (Section 2.2), yet their aggregation rules are fixed at design time and applied uniformly across all targets. As documented in Section 5.1, the agentic pipeline varies the relative emphasis on each physicochemical axis from system to system (CV ranging from 10.9 % for interaction quality to 33.8–44.8 % for penalty tools; Figure 14), a context-adaptive behaviour that fixed-rule consensus cannot reproduce. The practical consequence extends beyond numerical accuracy: for every ranking decision, the agent produces a structured rationale identifying the metrics that favoured or penalised each candidate (Section 5.3), enabling domain-expert audit and iterative refinement, properties that Section 2.2 characterised as absent from all existing scoring paradigms. The comparison is not uniformly in the agent’s favour: MM-GBSA captures solvation thermodynamics that the current tool suite omits (Section 5.2), and consensus methods achieve their reported accuracy gains on benchmarks of hundreds to thousands of complexes, a scale at which the present evaluation ( m = 10 ) cannot provide a statistically powered comparison. 

ML-based scoring and pose prediction. Machine-learning scoring functions and generative docking models represent the principal accuracy frontier against which the agentic approach must be positioned. As reviewed in Section 2.2, Gnina’s CNN ensemble achieves 73 % top-1 redocking success on CrossDocked2020, compared with 58 % for AutoDock Vina [ 15 , 16 ], and DiffDock reports 38 % top-1 success in a blind-docking setting where conventional samplers reach 23 % [ 17 ]. The agent’s 50 % accuracy on ten systems (95 % Wilson CI [23 .7, 76 .3] %; Table 2) cannot be compared to these figures on equal statistical footing: the benchmark scales differ by two to three orders of magnitude, the tasks are not identical (re-ranking a pre-generated ensemble versus redocking or blind docking), and Gnina’s training corpus overlaps with the PDBbind 2016 data from which the benchmark is drawn, an advantage the training-data-free agentic pipeline does not share. We therefore do not claim competitive numerical accuracy; the contribution lies in a qualitatively different output class (a structured, metric-by-metric rationale accompanying each ranking decision) 51 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses rather than in numerical superiority. The PoseBusters validation framework [ 12 ] offers an instructive counterpoint: it evaluates the same physicochemical properties that the agent’s tool suite computes (clashes, strain, interaction geometry; Sections 3.2.3–3.2.4) and demonstrated that physics-based docking programs outperform deep-learning methods once such validity checks are enforced. The agent’s architecture can be viewed as extending this principle from binary validity assessment to ordinal ranking: rather than flagging a pose as physically valid or invalid, the tools quantify each criterion on a continuous scale and the reasoning layer integrates these scales into an explicit comparative judgement (Section 5.3). This design also carries a practical asymmetry: ML methods require large curated training sets, are sensitive to domain shift when targets fall outside the training distribution (Supplementary Section A.1), and must be retrained as new structural data accumulate; the agentic pipeline requires no training data and generalises through the LLM’s domain knowledge and the physics-based tool outputs, though at the cost of the LLM-specific limitations discussed in Section 5.3. 

Agentic AI and LLMs for scientific reasoning. The agentic AI landscape reviewed in Section 2.3 provides the most direct comparator for the present framework. ChemCrow and Coscientist demonstrated that tool-augmented LLM agents can orchestrate complex chemistry workflows (synthesis planning, property prediction, and robotic experimentation) but both systems were evaluated through expert judgement or experimental outcomes on open-ended tasks rather than against an objective structural ground truth [ 22 , 23 ]. Section 2.3 identified the resulting gap: no tool-augmented chemistry agent had reported quantitative accuracy, faithfulness, or decision-attribution metrics against a crystallographic benchmark. The present work addresses this gap by applying the agentic paradigm to a specific, well-defined evaluation task (ranking pre-generated docking poses against each other on physicochemical merit, validated against a crystallographic ground truth (Section 4.2)) whose binary correctness criterion enables the full suite of diagnostic analyses that open-ended tasks preclude. The narrowness of the task is not a limitation but a design requirement: because ground-truth correctness is computable for every decision, it becomes possible to measure not only whether the agent selects the correct pose (50 %; Table 2) but also why it succeeds or fails, through metric separation (Figure 9), reasoning faithfulness ( ρ = +0 .83 ;Table 10), outcome-stratified weight attribution (Table 11), and per-system failure-mode diagnosis (Section 4.5). This combination constitutes a methodological template transferable to other scientific domains in which agentic AI performs comparative evaluation: wherever an objective ground truth exists, the same decomposition (accuracy, faithfulness, attribution, and failure-mode analysis) can characterise not just the agent’s performance but the alignment between its stated reasoning and the evidence it was given. 

5.6 The Retention-Recovery Asymmetry and Practical Implications Interpreting the 80%/20% accuracy contrast. The partition-stratified accuracy analysis (Section 4.4) reveals an asymmetric operational profile. On the five Smina-success systems, the agent preserved the correct identification in four cases ( Acc + = 80 .0 % , 4/5; Table 4); the sole regression (3HS4, Category B) arose because the ground-truth pose was metric-inferior to a competing conformation on every dimension the tool suite evaluates (Section 5.2). On the five Smina-failure systems, only 3OXC was recovered ( Acc − = 20 .0 % , 1/5), where a ∼20 kcal/mol conformational-strain differential provided a physics-based signal strong enough for the reasoning layer to override the scoring-function ranking (Section 4.5). The four unrecovered systems (2HA6, 4JFL, 4MLT, 4ZLS (Category D)) are precisely those in which the ground-truth pose offers no metric advantage over its competitors (Section 5.2), confirming that the tool-suite coverage ceiling diagnosed in that section is the proximate cause of the low recovery rate. The resulting profile (high retention, low recovery) characterises the framework as a reliable curator of existing correct rankings rather than a powerful recovery engine for scoring-function failures, a pattern the results themselves described as conservative (Section 4.4). A sample-size caveat is essential: each partition contains only five systems, so a single additional recovery would shift Acc − from 20 % to 40 %, and the current values should be read as descriptive point estimates rather than definitive performance bounds. 

Practical implications for structure-based drug design. The RMSD distribution of the agent’s selections (Table 3) shapes the practical deployment model. None of the five misidentifications falls in the mild category ( ∆RMSD < 1.0 Å); instead, errors span the moderate-to-severe range (1.51–4.32 Å, mean 2.92 Å), indicating that the agent either identifies a near-native conformation or selects one that departs substantially from the crystallographic reference (Section 4.3). This absence of a “close miss” regime argues against treating the top-ranked pose as a final answer and favours a workflow in which the agent’s selection is regarded as a hypothesis for visual inspection by a domain expert. The top-k

relaxed accuracy analysis (Figure 13) supports this recommendation at matched ranks k ≤ 3: accuracy rises from 50 % at k = 1 to 60 % at k = 2 (recovering 4MLT) and 70 % at k = 3 (recovering 4JFL). The plateau beyond k = 3 is a configuration artefact of the prompt’s truncated-emission convention, not a property of the agent’s underlying ranking ability, so this figure is directly comparable to Smina only at k ≤ 3 (Section 4.7). Within that matched range the three remaining failures (2HA6, 3HS4, 4ZLS) were never ranked favourably by the agent. A shortlist of three poses (each accompanied by the structured, metric-by-metric rationale documented in Section 5.3) would therefore capture the 52 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses correct conformation in seven of ten benchmark systems while retaining the structured per-pose rationale for each candidate. Crucially, even when the agent’s top selection is incorrect, the reasoning trace retains diagnostic value. The 4JFL case study (Table 9) illustrates this: the agent identified limitations in its own metric coverage (unmodelled water bridges, threshold-sensitive burial ratios) and proposed concrete remediation, including re-docking with alternative pocket definitions and explicit water placement (Section 4.5). Finally, two ensemble-level descriptors covary with outcome in the present sample: mean ensemble size (12.4 poses for correct vs. 20.0 for incorrect systems; point-biserial 

r = −0.668 ) and TQS coefficient of variation (20.1 % vs. 35.7 %; r = −0.739 ; Section 4.7). The nominal p-values (p = 0 .035 and p = 0 .015 , uncorrected for multiple comparisons) are reported descriptively: with n = 10 and several candidate descriptors examined, these correlations are exploratory and do not support an inferential claim on their own. Because both quantities can be computed from the tool outputs before the reasoning step, they could serve as pre-screening indicators that flag systems warranting additional manual review or tool-suite expansion, a prospect examined further in Section 5.8. 

5.7 Limitations Benchmark scale and statistical power. The most consequential limitation is the benchmark’s scale. Ten systems comprising 162 docked poses (Section 4.1) yield a 95 % Wilson confidence interval of [23 .7, 76 .3] % around the observed 50 % accuracy (Table 2; Equation 12), a 53-percentage-point range that precludes definitive comparison with any single-function baseline, including the Smina reference that achieves 50 % by construction on the balanced design (Section 3.6). The partition-stratified estimates are more fragile still: with n = 5 systems per group, a single additional recovery would shift Acc − from 20.0 % to 40.0 % (Section 5.6), and no formal hypothesis test comparing agent and scoring-function accuracy is feasible at this sample size. As discussed in Section 2.4, this constraint reflects a deliberate design trade-off. The quantitative evaluation framework (accuracy, faithfulness quantification, metric decomposition, and automated failure-mode diagnosis) scales to hundreds of systems, provided the agent emits structured machine-readable output alongside the reasoning trace. What the small benchmark uniquely enables is the qualitative case-study examination of individual reasoning traces with verbatim excerpts (Section 4.5), a narrative analysis that would be prohibitively time-consuming at the scale of CASF-2016’s 285 complexes [ 8]. Several partial mitigations temper the statistical limitation. The ten systems span five protein families (Table 1), and the balanced Smina-success/failure partition enables controlled comparison across outcome categories (Table 4). The exact one-sided binomial test against the random baseline ( p < 0.001 ; Table 2) confirms that the agent’s discriminative ability exceeds chance, even if the magnitude of its advantage over Smina cannot be resolved at m = 10 . Nevertheless, generalisability to the broader PDBbind landscape ( ∼4,800 refined-set complexes [ 32 ]) or to clinical drug discovery targets remains an open question that only a scaled evaluation, such as an extension to the full CASF-2016 core set, can address (Section 5.8). 

LLM dependency and reproducibility. Section 5.3 flagged model dependency and inference stochasticity as inherent constraints of the LLM reasoning layer; here we examine each in detail. First, all results were obtained through the OpenAI API (Section 3.1), which provides no mechanism to pin a specific model checkpoint. Unlike open-weight models whose parameters can be archived alongside the analysis code, API-accessed models may be updated silently by the provider, so an identical pipeline invocation at a later date could yield different rankings without any change to the system prompt, tools, or input data, a version-opacity risk shared by all API-dependent scientific workflows [ 22 , 23 ]. Second, only GPT-5 was tested (Section 3.4); whether the same system prompt and tool outputs would elicit comparable reasoning quality from alternative architectures (Claude, Gemini, or open-source models such as LLaMA) remains unknown. Because the system prompt encodes domain-specific evaluation heuristics in natural language rather than in model-specific tokens, it is in principle architecture-agnostic, but empirical confirmation across providers has not been attempted. Third, LLM inference is inherently non-deterministic; the evaluation employed a single run per system, so each ranking represents one draw from an uncharacterised distribution. Inter-run variance (in pose selection, stated confidence, and weight attribution) has not been quantified, and it is therefore unknown whether the observed 50 % accuracy (Table 2) reflects a stable operating point or a fortunate sample. A structural mitigation partially bounds the reproducibility risk: the analysis tools that produce the numerical inputs to the reasoning step are fully deterministic (Section 3.1), so stochasticity is confined to the LLM layer and repeated runs would operate on identical metric values. Furthermore, the modular architecture separates the LLM backend from the tool suite, system prompt, and evaluation protocol, enabling alternative models to be substituted without modifying the analysis pipeline, a flexibility leveraged in the multi-LLM evaluation proposed in Section 5.8. 

Computational cost and latency. The cost structure of the agentic pipeline differs qualitatively from that of conventional scoring approaches. Empirical scoring functions such as Smina evaluate a complete ensemble in seconds per ligand [ 5 ], and ML-based rescoring with Gnina adds negligible inference time once the CNN has been trained [ 15 ]; neither incurs per-invocation monetary expenditure. Physics-based rescoring with MM-GBSA increases processing time from seconds to hours per system (Supplementary Section A.1) [ 3], yet still requires only local computation. 53 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses The agentic pipeline introduces two additive cost components. First, the six primary and three derived analysis tools (Section 3.1) execute sequentially for every pose; for the benchmark ensembles of 5–20 conformations (Table 1), this computational phase completes in minutes per system on a standard workstation but scales linearly with ensemble size. Second, the LLM reasoning call, which concatenates all anonymised analysis files into a single context together with the ∼7,800 -word system prompt and processes them at reasoning effort "high" (Section 3.4), adds both per-token API cost and wall-clock latency that grow with the number of poses and the depth of the resulting chain-of-thought (873 ± 101 words across the ten benchmark systems; Section 4.7). The present evaluation did not record absolute wall-clock times or API expenditures, so the magnitude of this overhead cannot be quantified precisely; nevertheless, the per-system cost is orders of magnitude greater than the effectively zero marginal cost of Smina rescoring. This cost profile renders the agentic approach impractical for high-throughput virtual screening campaigns in which millions of compounds must be ranked. The framework is instead positioned for a late-stage refinement workflow in which a docking engine has already narrowed the candidate set to a small number of poses (5–20 per lead compound, the range represented by the benchmark) and where the interpretability of the ranking decision (Section 5.3) justifies the additional expense. A partial mitigation follows from the modular architecture (Section 3.1): because the analysis tools are deterministic and independent of the LLM, their outputs can be cached and re-used across multiple model invocations, confining repeated expenditure to the reasoning call alone. 

Force field and tool-suite limitations. The tool-suite coverage ceiling diagnosed in Section 5.2 has specific tech-nical roots in four classes of limitation. First, the conformational strain tool employs the MMFF94 force field [ 44 ](Section 3.2.3), whose absolute energies are systematically elevated across all benchmark systems (44–97 kcal/mol; Section 5.1). This discrepancy with the physically expected range ( ≲ 5 kcal/mol for the majority of crystallographic protein–ligand complexes [ 46 ]) is flagged directly in the Methods where the strain tool is introduced (Section 3.2.3), so that the absolute values appearing in the case studies and figures are read only as relative discriminators across poses of the same ligand. The agent’s system prompt adopts this relative-only interpretation explicitly (Section 4.5); what the present framework cannot recover is the absolute magnitude of the penalty, which more accurate force fields or quantum-mechanical torsion scans could alleviate (Section 5.8). A secondary concern arises when MMFF94 parameter-isation fails and the tool falls back to UFF (Algorithm 1), which lacks the atom-type granularity needed for reliable organic-molecule energetics. Second, water-mediated interactions are captured only through PLIP’s water-bridge detection (Section 3.2.1), which requires an explicit crystallographic water molecule to be present in the input structure. Desolvation entropy, water-network reorganisation, and the energetic cost of displacing ordered solvent molecules are not modelled by any tool in the current suite. The 3HS4 failure exemplifies the consequence: decomposing Smina’s scoring terms (Table 7) revealed that pose_01’s advantage resides entirely in the non-directional hydrogen-bond term (0.87 kcal/mol weighted), a continuous polar complementarity measure with no equivalent in the agent’s tool suite. The agent itself identified “water-mediated networks and protein side-chain repositioning” as unmodelled confounders (Section 4.5), yet had no quantitative mechanism to incorporate this insight into its ranking, precisely the solvation gap that Section 5.2 identified as contributing to the tool-suite ceiling. Third, all tools operate on static, post-docking coordinates: protein flexibility, side-chain repacking, and induced-fit rearrangements are absent from the evidence base. The agent recognised this constraint in the 4JFL trace, proposing re-docking with alternative pocket definitions as a remediation (Section 4.5), but such proposals remain outside the pipeline’s current execution scope. Fourth, PLIP applies fixed geometric cutoffs to detect interactions (Section 3.2.1): contacts marginally outside these thresholds are invisible, while those marginally inside receive equal weight. The interaction quality assessment tool (§3.2.7) partially compensates by scoring each detected contact’s geometry on a continuous scale, yet the upstream binary detection step discards information that a continuous scoring function would retain, an information-loss pattern that the agent cannot mitigate through reasoning alone. Visual inspection of the four representative systems during figure preparation corroborated this cutoff sensitivity across multiple tools: in 3HS4, for example, the two steric clashes penalising the correct pose (pose_01, Table 6) arise against protein heavy atoms in flexible side chains of the carbonic-anhydrase active site that would reasonably accommodate minor rigid-body relaxation upon ligand binding; the clash detector uses the static, unminimised complex and therefore flags these marginal overlaps as penalties rather than as the small, readily relievable contacts they represent. Water molecules and metal ions are explicitly excluded from the clash calculation by design (Section 3.2.4), so the 3HS4 penalty is not a solvent-inclusion artefact. In the same system, the π-stacking contact with HIS94A that PLIP reported exclusively for the agent’s selected pose_02 is visible at a marginally longer distance in pose_01 as well, placing it just beyond PLIP’s detection threshold rather than genuinely absent. These observations illustrate a broader pattern: binary-threshold tools can systematically overstate the metric distance between poses that are structurally more similar than their tabulated profiles suggest, contributing to the attention-threshold effect that excluded the correct 3HS4 pose from the agent’s top-seven ranking. Collectively, these four classes of limitation define the physics that the reasoning layer can access and thereby constrain the performance ceiling documented in Section 5.2; their remediation constitutes the most direct path to improved accuracy (Section 5.8). 54 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Ground-truth assumptions. The entire evaluation rests on the assumption that the crystallographic ligand confor-mation constitutes the correct binding mode and that heavy-atom symmetry-corrected RMSD to that conformation (Equation 10) is an appropriate measure of pose quality [ 10 ]. Three limitations of this assumption warrant explicit acknowledgement. First, crystal structures are determined under cryogenic conditions and lattice-packing constraints that may distort the ligand geometry relative to the physiological binding mode: differences in temperature, pH, and crystal contacts can shift torsion angles or reposition flexible substituents, so the deposited conformation is not necessarily the most biologically relevant one. Second, the 2.0 Å near-native threshold used throughout the evaluation (Section 3.6.2) is a field convention [ 4, 8], not a physical law. A pose at 1.9 Å that disrupts a critical hydrogen bond may be less pharmacologically useful than an alternative at 2.5 Å that better recapitulates the room-temperature interaction pattern, a disconnect between geometric proximity and energetic quality that Section 2.4 noted and that Greenidge et al. documented quantitatively [ 3 ]. Third, the single-correct-pose assumption implicit in Equation 10 may oversimplify reality: multiple binding modes can coexist in solution, and a docked conformation that reproduces a secondary mode would be penalised as incorrect even if it represents a physically accessible state. Two features of the benchmark design partially mitigate these concerns. All ten ground-truth RMSDs lie well within the threshold (0.43–1.97 Å; Section 4.1), eliminating borderline cases where the classification would be sensitive to small perturbations. Furthermore, the without-native evaluation configuration (Section 3.7.1) excludes the crystallographic conformation from the candidate pool, so the agent discriminates among computationally generated docked poses rather than recognising an experimentally determined structure, a design that tests genuine ranking ability rather than pattern-matching to a privileged input. Nevertheless, the reliance on a single crystallographic reference per system means that the reported accuracy (Table 2) should be interpreted as performance against a conventional, imperfect ground truth rather than against a definitive biological standard. 

System prompt engineering. Section 5.3 identified the coupling between prompt phrasing and decision behaviour as an inherent constraint; the present paragraph examines the specific over-fitting and design-choice risks that this coupling creates. The ∼7,800 -word system prompt (Section 3.4) was developed iteratively against a small pool of exploratory systems drawn from the same PDBbind 2016 corpus as the benchmark. For transparency we state explicitly that the ten evaluation systems listed in Table 1 were not rigorously held out from prompt development: exploratory tuning inspected PDBbind complexes that overlap, at least in part, with the final ten systems, so the benchmark cannot be treated as a fully disjoint test set. The encoded thresholds (for example, the 40 % burial cutoff that gates surface-bound poses out of top-tier consideration, or the 15 kcal/mol strain value flagged as a tiebreaker penalty) may therefore be calibrated to the physicochemical characteristics of systems that subsequently appeared in evaluation rather than to the broader docking landscape, and the reported 50% accuracy should be read accordingly. Because no formal held-out validation set was set aside during prompt development, the extent of this over-fitting cannot currently be quantified; establishing disjointness via a fresh, independently curated benchmark is identified as a priority next-round revision (Section 5.8). A related concern is the four-level hierarchical decision framework itself (binding mode > interaction quality > interaction quantity > tiebreaker penalties; Section 3.4), which encodes the designer’s domain intuitions about the relative importance of physicochemical criteria. The anti-bias section of the system prompt states that “surface binders should never rank first, even with high interaction counts” (Section 3.1), a deliberately strong directive designed to counteract the LLM’s tendency to over-weight raw interaction counts. While effective for deep-pocket targets where surface binding genuinely indicates a docking artefact, this rule could penalise legitimate binding modes in targets with shallow grooves, solvent-exposed allosteric sites, or protein-protein interaction hotspots, where even the correct pose may exhibit low burial ratios. The 4JFL failure illustrates a related consequence: the agent applied the hierarchy consistently yet undervalued hydrogen-bond geometry quality relative to burial in a shallow binding site (Table 9; Section 4.5), a weighting limitation traceable to the specific priority ordering rather than to a reasoning error. Alternative hierarchies (for instance, elevating interaction geometry above binding-mode gating for targets with shallow or solvent-exposed pockets) have not been evaluated, and it is unknown whether the current ordering is broadly optimal or merely adequate for the benchmark. The modular prompt architecture partially mitigates these risks: because each of the seven named sections (Section 3.4) encodes a functionally independent aspect of the agent’s behaviour, individual components can be modified or replaced without disrupting the remainder, a property that would enable targeted ablation studies in which, for example, the decision hierarchy is permuted while holding all other sections constant. Such systematic optimisation, potentially automated through data-driven prompt-tuning frameworks, is identified as a priority future direction (Section 5.8). 

5.8 Future Directions Scaling the benchmark. The statistical-power limitation diagnosed in Section 5.7 identifies benchmark scaling as the most direct path to stronger conclusions. Two complementary strategies are envisaged. First, extending the evaluation to the full CASF-2016 core set, 285 protein–ligand complexes partitioned into 57 target clusters (Section 2.4) [ 8], would enable head-to-head comparison with the 25 scoring functions already benchmarked on that corpus, placing 55 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses the agent’s accuracy within an established league table rather than against the single Smina reference available at 

m = 10 . Second, a stratified sample of approximately 100 systems drawn from the broader PDBbind general set (>11,000 complexes [ 32 ]) could be designed to preserve the balanced Smina-success/failure partition (Section 3.6) while spanning a broader range of protein families, ligand flexibility classes, and scoring-function failure severities, dimensions along which the present ten-system benchmark cannot characterise performance. The statistical gains from either strategy are substantial: at the observed 50 % accuracy, a 100-system evaluation would narrow the 95 % Wilson confidence interval from the current [23 .7, 76 .3] % (Equation 12; Table 2) to approximately [40 , 60] %, reducing the interval width from 53 to ∼20 percentage points and for the first time permitting a formal two-proportion hypothesis test comparing the agent with the Smina baseline. A scaled benchmark would also provide the statistical power needed to assess the candidate ensemble-difficulty descriptors, ensemble size and TQS coefficient of variation, that Section 5.6 flagged as exploratory covariates of outcome ( r = −0.668 and r = −0.739 , respectively, uncorrected; Section 4.7). With m ≥ 100 systems, multivariate logistic regression could determine whether these descriptors jointly predict agent failure and, if so, whether they could serve as pre-invocation screening criteria that route high-difficulty ensembles to manual expert review or to the expanded tool suite proposed below, thereby targeting agentic evaluation at the systems most likely to benefit from it. 

Multi-LLM evaluation. The single-model dependency acknowledged in Section 5.7 can be addressed directly by replicating the evaluation across multiple LLM backends while holding the tool suite, system prompt, and benchmark constant. Because the analysis tools are fully deterministic (Section 3.1), every model would operate on identical metric inputs, isolating the reasoning layer as the sole source of inter-model variation. The comparison should span three axes already quantified for GPT-5: best-pose identification accuracy (Table 2), reasoning faithfulness as measured by the Spearman correlation between stated weights and objective metric separations ( ρ = +0 .83 ; Table 10), and the per-tool weight distributions that capture each model’s evaluative priorities (Figure 14). Candidate architectures include both proprietary frontier models, Claude and Gemini, and open-weight alternatives such as LLaMA-3 and Mistral, whose parameters can be archived alongside the analysis code to restore the checkpoint-pinning capability that the current API-dependent workflow lacks (Section 5.7). Open-weight models would additionally eliminate per-invocation API cost and enable local deployment in environments where data confidentiality precludes cloud-based inference. The faithfulness axis is particularly informative: intervention-based studies have demonstrated that larger models can exhibit 

lower faithfulness than smaller ones [ 28 ], and that biasing features in the input can induce systematically unfaithful explanations without affecting surface-level plausibility [ 27 ], findings that caution against assuming the ρ = +0 .83 

concordance observed with GPT-5 will transfer to alternative architectures. A secondary objective is to determine whether the ∼7,800 -word system prompt (Section 3.4) transfers intact across providers or requires model-specific adaptation. If the same prompt elicits comparable accuracy and faithfulness from architecturally diverse models, the framework’s claim to model-agnosticism would be empirically grounded; if performance degrades for specific backends, prompt–model co-optimisation, potentially automated through the data-driven tuning frameworks discussed below, would become a prerequisite for generalisable deployment. 

Expanding the analysis tool suite. The tool-suite coverage ceiling that Section 5.2 identified as the proximate cause of the 20 % recovery rate, and whose four technical roots Section 5.7 diagnosed in detail, defines the most direct path to improved accuracy: each proposed tool addition targets a specific physics gap that the current nine-tool suite (Section 3.1) leaves unmodelled. The highest-priority expansion concerns conformational strain. MMFF94’s systematic overestimation (44–97 kcal/mol across all benchmark systems vs. the ≲5 kcal/mol expected from crystallographic surveys [ 46 ]; Section 5.7) confines the agent to relative strain comparisons (Section 4.5); replacing the force field with a higher-fidelity alternative, OPLS4 [ 53 ] or a quantum-mechanical-accuracy neural network potential such as ANI-2x [ 54 ], would recover absolute physical meaning, while Cambridge Structural Database–derived torsional strain filters [ 11 ] offer a complementary, database-statistical approach that bypasses force-field parametrisation altogether. The practical significance of improved strain fidelity is underscored by the 3OXC result: a ∼20 kcal/mol differential was sufficient for recovery (Section 4.5), suggesting that even modest gains in strain accuracy could introduce discriminative signal in the four Category D systems where the current tool failed. A second priority is explicit solvation modelling. Water-mediated interactions are currently captured only when a crystallographic water molecule is present in the input structure (Section 3.2.1); desolvation entropy, water-network reorganisation, and the energetic cost of displacing ordered solvent remain unmodelled (Section 5.7). Incorporating a per-residue energy decomposition via MM-GBSA [ 3 ] would simultaneously address this solvation gap and introduce residue-level binding energetics, enabling the agent to identify which protein residues contribute most to binding and to assess whether key pharmacophoric interactions are formed, a capability none of the current tools provides. Third, pharmacophore mapping would supply structure–activity context by comparing each pose’s interaction pattern against a reference pharmacophore model for the target, distinguishing conformations that satisfy known pharmacophoric requirements from those that achieve high interaction counts through non-essential contacts, a distinction relevant to the 4JFL failure, where the selected pose matched the ground truth on aggregate interaction metrics yet differed in pharmacophoric alignment (Section 4.5). Fourth, supplementing PLIP with 56 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses a continuous interaction-profiling tool, one that scores atom-pair contacts on a smooth potential rather than applying binary geometric cutoffs (Section 3.2.1), would retain the marginal contacts that the current detection step discards, improving the information gradient available to the reasoning layer. A guiding principle for all four expansions is empirical validation on the existing failure systems: inclusion should be contingent on demonstrable improvement in metric separation (Figure 9), the diagnostic that Section 5.1 established as the strongest correlate of decision correctness. 

Systematic prompt optimisation. The over-fitting and design-choice risks that Section 5.7 diagnosed (thresholds calibrated to ten systems, an untested four-level hierarchy, and the 4JFL weighting failure (Table 9)) are amenable to data-driven remediation once a sufficiently large benchmark is available. Compiler-style prompt-optimisation frameworks such as DSPy [ 55 ] can treat the system prompt’s tunable parameters as a search problem: given a training partition of docking systems with known ground-truth poses, the framework optimises natural-language modules by evaluating candidate prompts against an objective metric (here, best-pose identification accuracy) and retaining the variant that maximises held-out performance. The modular seven-section architecture of the current prompt (Section 3.4) maps naturally onto this paradigm, because each section can be varied independently while holding the remaining six constant. Four parameter classes identified by the present evaluation constitute the initial search space: the binding-mode gating stringency (the burial threshold that determines whether surface-bound poses are eligible for top-tier ranking), the relative weight assigned to hydrogen-bond geometry quality versus raw interaction count, the strain-override threshold above which conformational strain triggers a tiebreaker penalty, and the overall priority ordering among the four hierarchy levels (Section 5.7). The 4JFL case provides a concrete validation target: a successful optimisation should learn to elevate hydrogen-bond geometry above binding-mode gating when no pose in the ensemble achieves deep-pocket classification (Section 4.5), correcting the specific weighting limitation that Section 5.7 traced to the manually encoded hierarchy. Because the outcome-stratified weight analysis revealed nearly identical mean weight profiles between correct and incorrect decisions (maximum difference ≤3.4 percentage points; Table 11), optimisation should target conditional weighting rules, context-dependent adjustments triggered by ensemble properties such as burial-class homogeneity or strain-landscape flatness, rather than global weight shifts, which the current results suggest are already near a reasonable operating point. A complementary experiment is a formal anonymisation ablation. Section 5.4 introduced the SHA-256 protocol as a preventive intervention against positional and label-based bias [ 31 ]but noted that its magnitude of effect had not been quantified. Comparing accuracy, faithfulness, and weight distributions between anonymised and non-anonymised conditions, on the same systems and with the same LLM, would isolate the contribution of the anonymisation layer and determine whether the protocol is essential, beneficial, or neutral for the ranking task. Together, prompt optimisation and the anonymisation ablation would transform the current manually engineered pipeline into an empirically calibrated system whose design choices are justified by held-out performance rather than by designer intuition alone. 

Prospective validation and hybrid approaches. The preceding directions address limitations that are measurable on retrospective benchmarks; the longest-term objective is to validate the agentic framework prospectively, within active drug discovery campaigns where experimental pose confirmation, X-ray co-crystallography of newly synthesised compounds, provides an unambiguous ground truth that the PDBbind-derived benchmark can only approximate (Section 5.7). In such a setting, the agent’s ranking would be generated before the crystal structure is determined, converting each prediction into a pre-registered hypothesis testable by structure determination. Section 5.6 argued that the framework’s current operational profile (high retention, low recovery) already positions it as a hypothesis generator for expert verification rather than a standalone decision-maker; prospective deployment would formalise this role and, crucially, accumulate labelled systems at a pace dictated by the medicinal-chemistry programme rather than by curator availability. A complementary strategy is to deploy the agent alongside an ML-based rescoring method such as Gnina [ 15 ] and use their agreement or disagreement as a consensus confidence signal. Because the two approaches rely on orthogonal evidence (the agent integrates physics-based tool outputs through natural-language reasoning, whereas Gnina learns a scoring function from structural training data (Section 5.5)) concordant top-ranked poses would carry higher expected accuracy than either method alone, while discordant outcomes would flag specific systems for expert review. The ensemble-difficulty descriptors that Section 5.6 identified as outcome-predictive, ensemble size and TQS coefficient of variation, could further stratify this triage, routing high-difficulty, discordant systems to manual analysis while accepting low-difficulty, concordant predictions with minimal oversight. An orthogonal path to variance reduction is internal to the agent itself. Because LLM inference is stochastic and only a single run per system was performed (Section 5.7), the observed rankings sample one draw from an uncharacterised distribution. Running the agent N times on identical tool outputs and aggregating via majority vote (or, more informatively, via confidence-weighted aggregation that down-weights low-confidence runs) would convert the single stochastic decision into a consensus estimate whose stability can be quantified by the fraction of runs that select the same pose. Self-consistency across permutations has been shown to improve GPT-3.5 accuracy by 7–18 percentage points in multiple-choice settings [ 31 ], and an analogous gain here would begin to close the recovery deficit that defines the framework’s current performance ceiling. Finally, the prospective setting enables a self-improvement loop unavailable in retrospective evaluation. After revealing the 57 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses experimentally determined ground truth, the correct pose and its metric profile can be fed back to the agent with the instruction to identify where its original reasoning diverged from the evidence; the resulting self-critique would yield explicit, natural-language hypotheses (for example, “the strain threshold was set too conservatively” or “hydrogen-bond geometry was under-weighted relative to burial”) that can be translated into targeted prompt modifications. A caveat from the faithfulness literature tempers expectations for this loop: post-hoc rationalisation is well documented in frontier models, with chain-of-thought demonstrations achieving 80–90 % of full-CoT performance even when the intermediate reasoning steps are invalid [ 28 ], so reflective critiques may reproduce surface-plausible explanations that do not identify the true causal origin of the error. Coupling self-improvement with the compiler-style optimisation proposed in Section 5.8, where DSPy evaluates each candidate prompt modification against held-out accuracy rather than against the agent’s own plausibility judgement, would provide an objective check on the reflection loop and close the feedback circuit between prospective performance data and prompt calibration. Together, the four directions outlined in this section (scaled benchmarking, multi-LLM evaluation, expanded tool suites, and systematic prompt optimisation) converge on a single programme: transforming the current proof-of-concept into a rigorously validated, empirically calibrated framework whose design choices are grounded in held-out experimental evidence rather than in retrospective analysis of ten curated systems. 

# 6 Conclusion 

This work introduced AgenticPosesRanker, an agentic AI framework that couples six deterministic, physically grounded analysis tools with large-language-model reasoning to rank protein–ligand docking poses. By preserving each physico-chemical observable as a separate input to an explicit chain-of-thought evaluation, rather than collapsing them into a single composite score, the framework enables context-dependent weighting that adapts to the distributional properties of each pose ensemble. Evaluated on a curated benchmark of ten protein–ligand systems (162 poses), the agent achieved 50.0% best-pose accuracy, significantly exceeding the 7.7% random-selection baseline ( p < 0.001 , one-sided binomial test) while matching the design-fixed Smina scoring baseline. Performance was markedly asymmetric across partitions: the agent retained 80% of Smina’s correct rankings but recovered only 20% of its failures, characterising the framework as a reliable curator of existing correct rankings rather than a powerful recovery engine for scoring-function errors. Decision-attribution analysis revealed that this asymmetry originates upstream of the reasoning layer: ground-truth poses in failure systems are metric-indistinguishable from their ensembles, offering no physics-based signal that any weighting scheme within the current tool suite could exploit. Correspondingly, the alignment between the agent’s stated tool weights and the objective metric separations of the selected pose, quantified as the per-system Spearman rank correlation, was high (median ρ = +0 .83 ) and comparable across correct and incorrect decisions, showing that the agent applies its evaluation criteria consistently regardless of outcome. This descriptive alignment measure does not, on its own, distinguish faithful introspection from internally coherent post-hoc rationalisation of the kind documented for frontier models [27, 28]. The principal bottleneck, therefore, is not reasoning quality but tool-suite coverage: unmodeled contributions from solvation free energy, water-mediated hydrogen-bond networks, protein conformational flexibility, and entropic effects define the ceiling of the current implementation. Critically, the transparent architecture makes this diagnosis possible, each failure can be traced to specific missing observables rather than attributed to an opaque aggregate score. This diagnosability distinguishes the agentic approach from conventional scoring functions and machine-learning rescorers, which achieve higher accuracy but offer limited mechanistic insight into individual ranking errors. These results establish a methodological template for evaluating agentic AI systems against objective ground truth in the natural sciences: accuracy alone is insufficient; faithfulness, decision attribution, and failure-mode diagnosis are necessary to distinguish reasoning-layer limitations from evidence-layer limitations. For structure-based drug design, the framework is best positioned not as a replacement for high-throughput scoring but as an interpretable curation layer for late-stage pose refinement, where the structured, metric-by-metric rationale accompanying each ranking decision provides actionable insight for medicinal chemists. Expanding the tool suite to address the identified coverage gaps, testing across multiple language models, and scaling the benchmark to larger datasets are the immediate priorities for advancing the approach toward prospective deployment. 

# 7 Code and Data Availability 

The source code and curated benchmark data will be made available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. A web interface for interactive pose ranking will be available at https://sofk.ch .58 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

# 8 Statements and Declarations 

Author contributions. S.K. conceived the project, designed and implemented the agentic pipeline, curated the bench-mark, conducted the evaluation, performed the analyses, produced the figures and tables, and drafted the manuscript. A.H.M. contributed to methodological design, provided technical guidance on computational chemistry tooling, and reviewed the manuscript. M.A.L. supervised the project, contributed to conceptual framing and methodological design, reviewed and edited the manuscript, and secured funding for the work. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 

Funding. This work was conducted as part of S.K.’s doctoral research at the Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Basel, under the supervision of M.A.L. No specific grant from public, commercial, or not-for-profit funding agencies was received for this study. 

Competing interests. S.K. declares no competing interests. A.H.M. declares no competing interests. M.A.L. declares no competing interests. 

Use of generative AI in manuscript preparation. The authors used large-language-model assistants (OpenAI GPT-5 and Anthropic Claude) during manuscript preparation for language polishing and reference cross-checking. All scientific content, analyses, interpretations, and conclusions are the authors’ own. All AI-assisted edits were reviewed and approved by the authors, who take full responsibility for the final manuscript. Generative AI was not used to produce research data, analyses, figures, or results. The use of GPT-5 as the reasoning backbone of the AgenticPosesRanker framework (the research object) is a methodological component described in Sections 3.1 and 3.4 and is distinct from this writing-assistance disclosure. 

Author contact information. Sofiene Khiari: research@sofk.ch, ORCID 0000-0003-0540-2052. Amr H. Mahmoud: amr.abdallah@unibas.ch. Markus A. Lill: markus.lill@unibas.ch, ORCID 0000-0003-3023-5188. 59 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

# A Supplementary Information 

A.1 Detailed Scoring-Function Benchmark Performance Empirical scoring functions. An evaluation of ten docking programs across more than 2 000 protein–ligand com-plexes found that pose-reproduction success rates ranged from roughly 60% to 80% depending on the program, yet binding-affinity correlations rarely exceeded r ≈ 0.60 even for the best-performing methods [ 7]. Similar trends emerge from the Comparative Assessment of Scoring Functions (CASF) [ 8] and from community benchmarks such as CSAR 2014, where docking power consistently surpassed scoring power across all participating methods and few achieved a Spearman ρ ≥ 0.5 for affinity ranking despite generating poses with median RMSDs below 2.0 Å [ 56 ]. This disparity reflects a design tension: because the weights are fitted to reproduce absolute binding free energies, they do not necessarily produce correct rank-orderings among the multiple poses of a single ligand [ 57 ]. Physics-based rescor-ing with Molecular Mechanics / Generalised Born Surface Area (MM-GBSA) or Poisson–Boltzmann Surface Area (MM-PBSA) includes explicit solvation modelling and energy minimisation, offering a more rigorous decomposition of the binding free energy [ 3]; however, the additional computation increases processing time from seconds to hours per system and the result remains a single composite score. 

Knowledge-based and consensus scoring benchmarks. Knowledge-based scoring functions such as DrugScore and PMF capture interaction patterns that complement the functional forms of empirical scorers, yet they share the same fundamental limitation: all physicochemical contributions are collapsed into a single, opaque numerical score [ 8 ]. Two prerequisites for effective consensus scoring have been identified empirically: each constituent function must achieve reasonable individual accuracy, and the functions must be sufficiently distinctive, making complementary rather than redundant errors [ 20 ]. Despite gains, classical consensus methods apply their aggregation rule uniformly across every target and every pose ensemble; the weight of each scoring function is fixed at design time and cannot adapt to the chemical context of a given binding site. 

Machine-learning scoring function benchmarks. Early machine-learning approaches trained random forests on atom-pair distance features, demonstrating that purely data-driven models could rival classical scorers on standardised benchmarks [ 58 ]. Performance, however, is tightly coupled to training-data coverage; Gnina’s redocking success drops from 73 % to 68 % on targets absent from its training distribution, and analogous domain-shift effects have been observed across deep-learning methods [ 15 , 16 ]. High RMSD-based accuracy does not guarantee physical plausibility: the PoseBusters validation framework showed that many deep-learning methods generate poses with steric clashes, incorrect stereochemistry, or non-standard bond geometries, causing classical force-field-based programs to outperform them once such validity checks are applied [12]. 

A.2 Pose Anonymisation Protocol Details 

The following paragraphs expand on the pose anonymisation protocol summarised in Section 3.3 of the main text. 

Anonymous code generation. Each pose is assigned a unique eight-character alphanumeric identifier drawn from a base-36 alphabet (digits 0-9 and uppercase letters A-Z). The identifier is derived by concatenating the system identifier (e.g. 1ERR ) and the original pose stem (e.g. pose_01 ) into a single string, computing its SHA-256 hash, and converting the first eight bytes of the digest to base-36 (Equation 9), where s is the system identifier, p the pose name, and ∥ denotes string concatenation (with an underscore separator in the implementation). The function is deterministic: the same system-pose pair always produces the same code. The eight-character length was chosen as a practical compromise: it provides 36 8 ≈ 2.8 × 10 12 possible codes, far more than needed for collision resistance within a single system’s pose set, while remaining short enough for the LLM to copy accurately into its output. By contrast, full 36-character UUIDs were found in early testing to increase the rate of transcription errors (truncated or mistyped identifiers) in the model’s responses, complicating automatic de-anonymisation. 

Content sanitisation. Anonymous codes are used as filenames for the analysis files (e.g. K7M9N2P4.analysis ). Before each section of tool output is appended to an analysis file, the content is passed through a sanitisation function that replaces every occurrence of the original pose name with a generic placeholder and strips file-path fragments that could leak identity information. Specifically, all strings matching pose_\d+ (case-insensitive) are replaced with a neutral token, preventing residual references from appearing in the text consumed by the LLM. The sanitisation is applied to every tool’s output, PLIP interaction reports, SASA summaries, strain energies, clash lists, polar-penalty tables, SMILES strings, and all three derived assessment metrics, before the analysis file is finalised. 60 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses The mapping between original pose names and anonymous codes is persisted to a JSON file ( pose_mapping.json )stored in the working directory alongside the analysis files, but this mapping file is never included in the context sent to the model. 

Context presentation. When the analysis files are assembled into the LLM’s input context, each file is introduced only by its anonymous code (e.g. “ Analysis File: K7M9N2P4 ”). The preamble explicitly instructs the model that pose identifiers are anonymised and that evaluation must be based solely on the computational metrics contained within each file. The system prompt further reinforces this with code-handling rules requiring the LLM to copy codes character-for-character when referencing poses in its reasoning, to never truncate or abbreviate them, and to verify each code against the analysis file headers before finalising its ranking. 

Post-inference de-anonymisation. After the LLM returns its ranking and chain-of-thought reasoning, both outputs are passed through a de-anonymisation step that replaces every occurrence of an anonymous code with the corresponding original pose name using word-boundary-aware regular-expression matching. The resulting human-readable output allows domain experts to interpret the ranking in terms of the familiar pose identifiers, while the original anonymous codes are preserved in the analysis log for auditability. The complete mapping (pose name → anonymous code) is also recorded in the ranking log alongside the system prompt and the raw model output, enabling full reconstruction of the anonymisation state for any given run. 

A.3 User Interface Implementation Details 

The following paragraphs expand on the user-interface description given in Section 3.5 of the main text. Figure S1 shows a screenshot of the deployed interface. 

Figure S1: Screenshot of the AgenticPosesRanker web interface. The left sidebar contains the configuration panel with API key entry, input file upload (supporting both user-provided files and pre-loaded example systems), and the “Start Analysis” button. The main content area is divided into two columns: (left) an interactive 3D molecular viewer powered by Mol* [ 38 ], displaying the protein-ligand complex with individual docked poses navigable via the model selector; and (right) a conversational chat interface through which the agent delivers its analysis results and users can ask follow-up questions. A “Download Conversation” button in the chat header enables export of the full analysis transcript. 61 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Page configuration and header. The application uses Streamlit’s wide layout mode to maximise horizontal space. A header at the top of the page displays the application title and a brief description of the system’s capabilities, orienting first-time users before any files are uploaded. 

Sidebar and configuration. A persistent sidebar on the left-hand side of the page provides the three configuration controls required before an analysis can begin: 1. API Key. A dialog for entering or updating the OpenAI API key. If a .env file containing the key is present in the working directory, the key is loaded automatically at startup; otherwise, the user supplies it through a password-masked text input. A colour-coded status badge in the sidebar indicates whether a valid key has been configured. 2. Input Files. A dialog that supports two complementary modes of data entry: • Example systems. A dropdown lists pre-loaded protein-ligand systems bundled with the application (the curated benchmark systems described in Section 3.6). Selecting an example system automatically sets the protein structure and pose files without requiring any file upload. • User uploads. When no example system is selected, two file-upload widgets appear. The first accepts a single protein structure in PDB format; the second accepts one or more docked poses in PDB format. Uploaded files are saved to a UUID-based workspace directory under the application’s data/ folder, ensuring that concurrent sessions do not interfere with one another. A second colour-coded status badge indicates whether both the protein and at least one pose file have been provided. 3. Start Analysis. A primary action button that launches the full analysis pipeline. The button is disabled (greyed out) until both the API key and input files have been configured, preventing premature execution. Once clicked, the button triggers the computational pipeline described in Section 3.4: protein filtering, complex construction, parallel tool execution, anonymisation, agent inference, and de-anonymisation. A legend at the bottom of the sidebar explains the colour-coded status badges: green (“Ready”) indicates a successfully configured component, and red (“Missing”) indicates a component that still requires user action. 

Two-column layout. The main content area is divided into two equal-width columns that are displayed side by side, providing simultaneous access to structural and textual information: • Left column, 3D Molecular Visualisation. An interactive molecular viewer powered by the Mol* [ 38 ]plugin, embedded as an HTML component. Before any files are uploaded, the viewer displays a placeholder message; once a protein structure and docked poses are provided, it renders the protein-ligand complex in three dimensions. Each docked pose is represented as a separate model within a combined PDB file: the protein coordinates are replicated in every model frame, and the ligand coordinates for each pose are converted from SDF to PDB format (via Open Babel [ 59 ]) and appended as HETATM records. The viewer supports standard molecular graphics interactions, rotation, translation, zoom, and residue selection, allowing users to visually inspect the poses while the agent’s analysis proceeds. The viewer uses a black background to maximise contrast with protein ribbon and ligand stick representations. Updates to the uploaded files (e.g. switching between example systems) immediately refresh the viewer. • Right column, Chat Interface. A conversational interface that serves as the primary channel for both analysis output and user interaction. The chat panel has three sub-components: 1. Message history. A scrollable container (fixed height of 600 px) that displays the full conversation between the user and the agent. Assistant messages are rendered with a wizard avatar and support expandable chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning sections; user messages use a developer avatar. Custom CSS reduces inter-message spacing to display more content within the visible area. 2. Text input. A chat input field at the bottom of the column, disabled until the analysis has been started at least once. After the initial ranking, users may type follow-up questions (e.g. “Why was pose X ranked below pose Y despite having more interactions?”), and the agent responds with access to the full analysis context and conversation history (Section 3.4). 3. Download button. A button in the chat header that exports the complete conversation, including all CoT reasoning sections, as a Markdown file timestamped with the current date and time, enabling offline review and archival. 62 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Analysis execution and progress feedback. When the user clicks “Start Analysis”, the agent’s introductory message is posted to the chat, listing the six analysis categories that will be evaluated (SMILES extraction, PLIP interaction analysis, SASA calculations, conformational strain, steric clashes, polar atom satisfaction). A Streamlit status widget then tracks the progress of each tool in real time, displaying the name of the currently executing step. The steps correspond to the full pipeline described in Section 3.4: complex PDB construction, SMILES extraction, PLIP interaction profiling, SASA calculation, conformational strain estimation, steric clash detection, unsatisfied polar atom penalty computation, finalisation of analysis log files, and generation of visualisation plots. Upon completion of the computational tools, the status widget transitions to a “complete” state. Visualisation plots generated during the analysis (metric distribution charts and interaction network diagrams) are displayed within the chat as an assistant message, providing immediate graphical feedback before the agent begins its ranking inference. The agent then receives the anonymised analysis files and produces its ranking and chain-of-thought justification, which are streamed into the chat panel as a final assistant message. On subsequent page loads, completed analyses are restored from session state: the status widget is rendered in its “complete” state and all prior chat messages, including reasoning sections, are faithfully reconstructed. 

Follow-up conversation. After the initial ranking, the chat input field is enabled, and users may pose clarifying or comparative questions. Each follow-up question is processed by the same GPT-5 agent with the skip_tools flag set to true: the pre-computed analysis files are re-loaded into the context alongside the full conversation history, ensuring that the agent can reference specific metrics or pose identifiers from any prior turn without re-executing the computational tools. This design keeps follow-up responses fast (seconds rather than minutes) while maintaining full analytical context. A spinner (“Thinking. . . ”) provides visual feedback during inference. 

Error handling. The interface implements comprehensive error handling at every stage of the pipeline. Missing dependencies are detected at startup and displayed as blocking error messages with installation instructions. Failures during tool execution (e.g. an SDF file that cannot be parsed, a PLIP analysis that returns no interactions) are caught, classified by a centralised error handler, and presented as structured error panels within the chat, identifying the error type, affected component, and suggested remediation. Critical errors halt the pipeline and update the status widget to an error state; the user is not left with a silently incomplete analysis. Network and API errors during GPT-5 inference are similarly intercepted and displayed, with the conversation history preserved so that users can retry after resolving the underlying issue. 

A.4 Data File Format and Native Pose Generation File format. For each system, the docking run produced a multi-conformer SDF file containing the generated poses together with their minimizedAffinity scores, which represent the Smina-minimised binding free energy estimates (kcal/mol). Each system directory provides the protein structure ( id _protein.pdb ), the crystallographic ligand ( id _ligand.sdf ), and the multi-pose docking output ( id _docked.sdf ) with per-pose minimizedAffinity 

properties. 

Native pose generation. To enable root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) comparison between docked poses and the experimentally determined binding mode, all structures must share a consistent atom representation, identical atom ordering, identical hydrogen treatment, and identical coordinate frame. Direct comparison of the crystallographic ligand SDF against the Smina-produced docked SDF is unreliable because the two files may differ in atom ordering, hydrogen placement, and internal coordinate conventions. A native pose is therefore regenerated for each system by passing the crystallographic ligand through Smina in scoring-only mode: 

smina -r id _protein.pdb -l id _ligand.sdf –score_only -o id _native.sdf 

The –score_only flag instructs Smina to read the input ligand coordinates without performing any conformational sampling or minimisation; it merely re-scores the existing pose and writes the result in the same internal format used for the docked poses. The native SDF thus inherits the same atom ordering and hydrogen convention as the docked conformations, enabling atom-by-atom RMSD calculation. The Smina binary used for this step corresponds to the October 2019 build, based on AutoDock Vina 1.1.2 [1]. 63 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

A.5 RMSD Calculation Details 

The symmetry-corrected RMSD was computed using the symmrmsd function of spyrmsd [ 10 ]. The function receives the three-dimensional coordinates, atomic numbers, and adjacency matrices of both the native and docked heavy-atom substructures. Because both structures originate from the same protein coordinate frame (via Smina processing), the RMSD was calculated directly on the input coordinates without prior superimposition or centering. 

A.6 SMILES Extraction and Ligand-Diversity Check 

The following paragraphs expand on the SMILES extraction tool summarised in Section 3.2.6 of the main text. 

Per-pose canonicalisation. The tool reads the raw pose file with RDKit [ 36 ], retaining explicit hydrogens during parsing, and then generates a canonical SMILES string with stereochemistry preserved. Canonicalisation guarantees that the same molecule always yields an identical string regardless of atom ordering in the input file, while the isomeric flag encodes chirality and double-bond geometry, properties that can critically influence binding. 

Ligand-diversity check. Before any pose is analysed, a diversity check is performed across all input poses. Each pose’s SMILES is normalised by removing explicit hydrogens and regenerating the canonical form, and the resulting set of unique normalised SMILES is inspected. If all poses share the same normalised SMILES, the system concludes that the poses are conformational variants of a single ligand, and the SMILES block is omitted from the anonymised analysis files passed to the LLM, since chemical identity is uninformative in this scenario. If two or more distinct SMILES are detected, the SMILES block is included for every pose so that the agent can identify structural differences between the molecules under comparison. The agent’s system prompt instructs the LLM that the absence of a SMILES block signals identical ligands across all poses and that, when present, SMILES should be used for structural interpretation rather than as a ranking criterion. 

Status in the present benchmark. All ten benchmark systems involve a single ligand docked in multiple conforma-tions, so the diversity check consistently finds identical SMILES and the SMILES block is omitted from every analysis file. The multi-ligand path was not exercised in the present evaluation. 

A.7 Software Environment and Tool Versions 

Table S1 collects the versions of all scientific-computing tools and binaries used to produce the results reported in this preprint. Where a snapshot identifier or build hash is available from the provider, it is stated in the note column; otherwise the released version label is reported and the corresponding caveat is noted. 64 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

Component Version / identifier Notes 

OpenAI GPT-5 (reasoning backbone) gpt-5 API-hosted model; no public snapshot identifier was exposed by the provider at the time of evaluation. Silent provider-side updates cannot be ruled out; see Sec-tion 5.7. OpenAI Agents SDK 0.5.0 Python SDK providing the agent runner and reasoning-event streaming. RDKit [36] 2024.03.x Used for SMILES extraction, polar-atom SMARTS matching, MMFF94 energy calculations, and SDF/PDB conversions. Minor version fixed within the project’s locked environment. PLIP [39, 40, 41] 3.0.0 (2025 release) Used via the Python API ( characterize_complex ). Deterministic, no trainable parameters. BioPython [43] 1.86 Used for Shrake–Rupley SASA and PDB parsing. Open Babel [59] 3.1.1 Used for SDF-to-PDB conversion in the Streamlit front-end (Mol* viewer only). 

spyrmsd [10] 0.5.x Symmetry-corrected heavy-atom RMSD. Smina [5] October 2019 build (based on AutoDock Vina 1.1.2 [1]) Precompiled binary used for both the Francoeur et al. cross-docked ensembles [ 16 ] and for native-pose gener-ation in scoring-only mode. A stable public build hash is not published; the release date is reported in lieu of a hash. Maestro [52] Schrödinger release at time of figure preparation Used only for the structural overlays in Figure 5 and the case-study insets; not part of the ranking pipeline. 

latexmk + pdfTeX TeX Live distribution (cur-rent release) Used to build the manuscript PDF. 

Table S1: Software environment. Versions and identifiers of the tools, libraries, and binaries used for the agentic pipeline and the benchmark evaluation. Where a vendor does not expose a stable snapshot identifier (for example, an API-hosted model), this is noted explicitly and discussed as a reproducibility limitation in Section 5.7. 65 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses 

# References 

[1] Oleg Trott and Arthur J. Olson. AutoDock Vina: improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. Journal of Computational Chemistry , 31(2):455–461, 2010. [2] Caterina Bissantz, Bernd Kuhn, and Martin Stahl. A medicinal chemist’s guide to molecular interactions. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 53(14):5061–5084, 2010. [3] Paulette A. Greenidge, Christian Kramer, Jean-Christophe Mozziconacci, and Woody Sherman. Improving docking results via reranking of ensembles of ligand poses in multiple X-ray protein conformations with MM-GBSA. 

Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling , 54(10):2697–2717, 2014. [4] Gregory L. Warren, C. Webster Andrews, Anna-Maria Capelli, Brian Clarke, Judith LaLonde, Millard H. Lambert, Mika Lindvall, Neysa Nevins, Simon F. Semus, Stefan Senger, et al. A critical assessment of docking programs and scoring functions. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 49(20):5912–5931, 2006. [5] David Ryan Koes, Matthew P. Baumgartner, and Carlos J. Camacho. Lessons learned in empirical scoring with Smina from the CSAR 2011 benchmarking exercise. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling ,53(8):1893–1904, 2013. [6] Francis Gaudreault and Rafael J. Najmanovich. FlexAID: Revisiting docking on non-native-complex structures. 

Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling , 55(7):1323–1336, 2015. [7] Zhe Wang, Huiyong Sun, Xiaojun Yao, Dan Li, Lei Xu, Youyong Li, Sheng Tian, and Tingjun Hou. Comprehensive evaluation of ten docking programs on a diverse set of protein–ligand complexes: The prediction accuracy of sampling power and scoring power. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics , 18(18):12964–12975, 2016. [8] Minyi Su, Qifan Yang, Yu Du, Guoqin Feng, Zhihai Liu, Yan Li, and Renxiao Wang. Comparative assessment of scoring functions: The CASF-2016 update. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling , 59(2):895–913, 2019. [9] Michael J. Hartshorn, Marcel L. Verdonk, Gianni Chessari, Suzanne C. Brewerton, Wijnand T. M. Mooij, Paul N. Mortenson, and Christopher W. Murray. Diverse, high-quality test set for the validation of protein–ligand docking performance. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 50(4):726–741, 2007. [10] Rocco Meli and Philip C. Biggin. spyrmsd: symmetry-corrected RMSD calculations in Python. Journal of Cheminformatics , 12(1):49, 2020. [11] Shuo Gu, Matthew S. Smith, Ying Yang, John J. Irwin, and Brian K. Shoichet. Ligand strain energy in large library docking. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling , 61(9):4331–4341, 2021. [12] Martin Buttenschoen, Garrett M. Morris, and Charlotte M. Deane. PoseBusters: AI-based docking methods fail to generate physically valid poses or generalise to novel sequences. Chemical Science , 15(9):3130–3139, 2024. [13] Holger Gohlke, Manfred Hendlich, and Gerhard Klebe. Knowledge-based scoring function to predict protein– ligand interactions. Journal of Molecular Biology , 295(2):337–356, 2000. [14] Ingo Muegge and Yvonne C. Martin. A general and fast scoring function for protein–ligand interactions: A simplified potential approach. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 42(5):791–804, 1999. [15] Andrew T. McNutt, Paul Francoeur, Rishal Aggarwal, Tomohide Masuda, Rocco Meli, Matthew Ragoza, Jocelyn Sunseri, and David Ryan Koes. GNINA 1.0: molecular docking with deep learning. Journal of Cheminformatics ,13:43, 2021. [16] Paul G. Francoeur, Tomohide Masuda, Jocelyn Sunseri, Andrew Jia, Richard B. Iovanisci, Ian Snyder, and David Ryan Koes. Three-dimensional convolutional neural networks and a cross-docked data set for structure-based drug design. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling , 60(9):4200–4215, 2020. [17] Gabriele Corso, Hannes Stärk, Bowen Jing, Regina Barzilay, and Tommi Jaakkola. DiffDock: Diffusion steps, twists, and turns for molecular docking. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [18] Paul S. Charifson, Joseph J. Corkery, Mark A. Murcko, and W. Patrick Walters. Consensus scoring: A method for obtaining improved hit rates from docking databases of three-dimensional structures into proteins. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 42(25):5100–5109, 1999. [19] Renxiao Wang, Yipin Lu, and Shaomeng Wang. Comparative evaluation of 11 scoring functions for molecular docking. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 46(12):2287–2303, 2003. [20] Jinn-Moon Yang, Yen-Fu Chen, Tsai-Wei Shen, Bruce S. Kristal, and D. Frank Hsu. Consensus scoring criteria for improving enrichment in virtual screening. Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling , 45(4):1134–1146, 2005. 66 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses [21] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2023. [22] Andres M. Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Baldassari, Andrew D. White, and Philippe Schwaller. Aug-menting large language models with chemistry tools. Nature Machine Intelligence , 6:525–535, 2024. [23] Daniil A. Boiko, Robert MacKnight, Ben Kline, and Gabe Gomes. Autonomous chemical research with large language models. Nature , 624:570–578, 2023. [24] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (NeurIPS) , 2022. [25] Boshi Wang, Sewon Min, Xiang Deng, Jiaming Shen, You Wu, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Huan Sun. Towards understanding chain-of-thought prompting: An empirical study of what matters. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) , pages 2717–2739, 2023. [26] Qing Lyu, Shreya Havaldar, Adam Stein, Li Zhang, Delip Rao, Eric Wong, Marianna Apidianaki, and Chris Callison-Burch. Faithful chain-of-thought reasoning. In Proceedings of the 13th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing and the 3rd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (IJCNLP-AACL) , pages 305–329, 2023. [27] Miles Turpin, Julian Michael, Ethan Perez, and Samuel R. Bowman. Language models don’t always say what they think: Unfaithful explanations in chain-of-thought prompting. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. [28] Tamera Lanham, Anna Chen, Ansh Radhakrishnan, Benoit Steiner, Carson Denison, Danny Hernandez, Dustin Li, Esin Durmus, Evan Hubinger, Deep Ganguli, et al. Measuring faithfulness in chain-of-thought reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13702 , 2023. [29] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 12:157–173, 2024. [30] Chujie Zheng, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, and Minlie Huang. Large language models are not robust multiple choice selectors. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [31] Raphael Tang, Crystina Zhang, Xueguang Ma, Jimmy Lin, and Ferhan Ture. Found in the middle: Permutation self-consistency improves listwise ranking in large language models. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL) , pages 2327–2340, 2024. [32] Renxiao Wang, Xueliang Fang, Yipin Lu, and Shaomeng Wang. The PDBbind database: collection of binding affinities for protein–ligand complexes with known three-dimensional structures. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry ,47(12):2977–2980, 2004. [33] Renxiao Wang, Xueliang Fang, Yipin Lu, Chao-Yie Yang, and Shaomeng Wang. The PDBbind database: methodologies and updates. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 48(12):4111–4119, 2005. [34] Lawrence D. Brown, T. Tony Cai, and Anirban DasGupta. Interval estimation for a binomial proportion. Statistical Science , 16(2):101–133, 2001. [35] Edwin B. Wilson. Probable inference, the law of succession, and statistical inference. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 22(158):209–212, 1927. [36] RDKit: Open-source cheminformatics. https://www.rdkit.org . Version 2025.09.2. [37] Streamlit, Inc. Streamlit: A faster way to build and share data apps, 2024. Accessed: 2025-01-15. [38] David Sehnal, Sebastian Bittrich, Mandar Deshpande, Radka Svobodová, Karel Berka, Václav Bazgier, Sameer Velankar, Stephen K. Burley, Jaroslav Koˇ ca, and Alexander S. Rose. Mol* Viewer: modern web app for 3D visualization and analysis of large biomolecular structures. Nucleic Acids Research , 49(W1):W431–W437, 2021. [39] Sebastian Salentin, Sven Schreiber, V. Joachim Haupt, Melissa F. Adasme, and Michael Schroeder. PLIP: fully automated protein–ligand interaction profiler. Nucleic Acids Research , 43(W1):W443–W447, 2015. [40] Melissa F. Adasme, Katja L. Linnemann, Sarah Naomi Bolz, Florian Kaiser, Sebastian Salentin, V. Joachim Haupt, and Michael Schroeder. PLIP 2021: expanding the scope of the protein–ligand interaction profiler to DNA and RNA. Nucleic Acids Research , 49(W1):W530–W534, 2021. 67 AgenticPosesRanker: An Agentic AI Framework for Physically Grounded Ranking of Protein–Ligand Docking Poses [41] Philipp Schake, Sarah Naomi Bolz, Katja Linnemann, and Michael Schroeder. PLIP 2025: introducing protein-protein interactions to the protein-ligand interaction profiler. Nucleic Acids Research , 53(W1):W463–W465, 2025. [42] A. Shrake and J. A. Rupley. Environment and exposure to solvent of protein atoms. Lysozyme and insulin. Journal of Molecular Biology , 79(2):351–371, 1973. [43] Peter J. A. Cock, Tiago Antao, Jeffrey T. Chang, Brad A. Chapman, Cymon J. Cox, Andrew Dalke, Iddo Friedberg, Thomas Hamelryck, Frank Kauff, Bartek Wilczynski, and Michiel J. L. de Hoon. Biopython: freely available Python tools for computational molecular biology and bioinformatics. Bioinformatics , 25(11):1422–1423, 2009. [44] Thomas A. Halgren. Merck molecular force field. I. Basis, form, scope, parameterization, and performance of MMFF94. Journal of Computational Chemistry , 17(5-6):490–519, 1996. [45] Paolo Tosco, Nikolaus Stiefl, and Gregory Landrum. Bringing the MMFF force field to the RDKit: implementation and validation. Journal of Cheminformatics , 6:37, 2014. [46] Emanuele Perola and Paul S. Charifson. Conformational analysis of drug-like molecules bound to proteins: An extensive study of ligand reorganization upon binding. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry , 47(10):2499–2510, 2004. [47] George A. Jeffrey. An Introduction to Hydrogen Bonding . Oxford University Press, 1997. [48] Thomas Steiner. The hydrogen bond in the solid state. Angewandte Chemie International Edition , 41(1):49–76, 2002. [49] Sandeep Kumar and Ruth Nussinov. Salt bridge stability in monomeric proteins. Journal of Molecular Biology ,293(5):1241–1255, 1999. [50] Andrew L. Hopkins, Colin R. Groom, and Alexander Alex. Ligand efficiency: A useful metric for lead selection. 

Drug Discovery Today , 9(10):430–431, 2004. [51] Miao Xiong, Zhiyuan Hu, Xinyang Lu, Yifei Li, Jie Fu, Junxian He, and Bryan Hooi. Can LLMs express their uncertainty? An empirical evaluation of confidence elicitation in LLMs. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. [52] Schrödinger, LLC. Maestro. Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY. Molecular visualisation software. Used for structural figures of representative systems. [53] Chao Lu, Chuanjie Wu, Delaram Ghoreishi, Wei Chen, Lingle Wang, Wolfgang Damm, Markus K. Dahlgren, Ellery Russell, Christopher D. Von Bargen, Robert Abel, Richard A. Friesner, and Edward D. Harder. OPLS4: Improving force field accuracy on challenging regimes of chemical space. Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation , 17(7):4291–4300, 2021. [54] Francois Berenger and Koji Tsuda. An ANI-2 enabled open-source protocol to estimate ligand strain after docking. 

Journal of Computational Chemistry , 46(1):e27478, 2024. [55] Omar Khattab, Arnav Singhvi, Paridhi Maheshwari, Zhiyuan Zhang, Keshav Santhanam, Sri Vardhamanan, Saiful Haq, Ashutosh Sharma, et al. DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving pipelines. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714 , 2023. [56] Heather A. Carlson, Richard D. Smith, Kelly L. Damm-Ganamet, Jeanne A. Stuckey, Aqeel Ahmed, Maire A. Convery, Donald O. Somers, Michael Kranz, Patricia A. Elkins, Guanglei Cui, Catherine E. Peishoff, Millard H. Lambert, and James B. Dunbar, Jr. CSAR 2014: A benchmark exercise using unpublished data from pharma. 

Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling , 56(6):1063–1077, 2016. [57] Rodrigo Quiroga and Marcos A. Villarreal. Vinardo: A scoring function based on Autodock Vina improves scoring, docking, and virtual screening. PLoS ONE , 11(5):e0155183, 2016. [58] Pedro J. Ballester and John B. O. Mitchell. A machine learning approach to predicting protein–ligand binding affinity with applications to molecular docking. Bioinformatics , 26(9):1169–1175, 2010. [59] Noel M. O’Boyle, Michael Banck, Craig A. James, Chris Morley, Tim Vandermeersch, and Geoffrey R. Hutchison. Open Babel: An open chemical toolbox. Journal of Cheminformatics , 3:33, 2011. 68