Title: Operator Learning for Surrogate Modeling of Wave-Induced Forces from Sea Surface Waves

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.06433v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Apr 2026 00:18:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 46

Markdown Content:
# Operator Learning for Surrogate Modeling of Wave-Induced Forces from Sea Surface Waves 

Shukai Cai a, ∗, Sourav Dutta a, Mark Loveland b, Eirik Valseth c,d , Peter Rivera-Casillas b, Corey Trahan b, Clint Dawson a

> a

Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, 201 E 24th St, Austin, 78712, TX, USA 

> b

Information Technology Laboratory, U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center, MS, USA 

> c

Department of Mechanical Engineering and Technology Management, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Ås, Norway 

> d

Department of Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing, Simula Research Laboratory, Oslo, Norway 

Abstract 

Wave setup plays a significant role in transferring wave-induced energy to currents and causing an increase in water elevation. This excess momentum flux, known as radiation stress, motivates the coupling of circulation models with wave models to improve the accuracy of storm surge prediction, how-ever, traditional numerical wave models are complex and computationally expensive. As a result, in practical coupled simulations, wave models are often executed at much coarser temporal resolution than circulation models. In this work, we explore the use of Deep Operator Networks (DeepONets) as a surrogate for the Simulating WAves Nearshore (SWAN) numerical wave model. The proposed surrogate model was tested on three distinct 1-D and 2-D steady-state numerical examples with variable boundary wave conditions and wind fields. When applied to a realistic numerical example of steady-state wave simulation in Duck, NC, the model achieved consistently high accuracy in predicting the components of the radiation stress gradient and the significant wave height across representative scenarios. 

Keywords: Deep Operator Network, Surrogate Modeling, Wave-Current 

> ∗

Corresponding author 

Email address: shukai.cai@utexas.edu (Shukai Cai) 

> arXiv:2604.06433v1 [physics.comp-ph] 7 Apr 2026

Interactions, Simulating Waves Nearshore 

1. Introduction 

Wind-driven ocean waves are a fundamental physical process that medi-ates the exchange of momentum, heat, and gases between the atmosphere and the ocean, directly influencing global climate patterns and coastal mor-phology. Beyond their role in Earth’s energy budget, these waves dictate the safety of maritime operations and the structural integrity of offshore infras-tructure. Numerical modeling of wind waves using spectral models is notori-ously difficult because it requires solving the Wave Action Balance Equation (WABE), which tracks the wave energy density across multiple dimensions, namely the spatio-temporal evolution across vast, irregular oceans, as well as the spectral distribution of energy across different frequencies and direc-tions [1, 2]. In particular, accurate modeling of the wave-wave interactions, represented as a nonlinear source term, involves complex multi-dimensional integrals, which are usually computationally intractable for real-time simu-lations or long-term projections. In addition, wave setup exhibits a significant nonlinear interaction with storm tides, forming a complex system of wave–current interactions. There-fore, accurate representation of these processes is essential to improve the accuracy of storm surge predictions. Causio et al. [3] showed that wave-induced surge components may contribute 10% - 30% to the total water level during storms. This wave-induced contribution originates from the transfer of momentum from surface waves to currents, which occurs through radiation stress [4]. As a result, water levels and flow patterns can be substantially impacted, particularly during hurricane events. To capture these effects, researchers have coupled circulation models with wave models, such as Sim-ulating WAve Nearshore + ADvanced CIRCulation (SWAN+ADCIRC) and Semi-implicit Cross-scale Hydroscience Integrated System Model + Wind Wave Model-III (SCHISM+WWM3) [5, 6]. However, due to their intrin-sic complexity and computational cost, phase-averaged spectral wave models typically account for a significant portion of the overall computational cost in these coupled wave-current simulations. A wave model typically accounts for physical processes governing the generation, transformation, and dissipation of ocean waves. Wave growth is primarily driven by wind forcing, while energy is dissipated through mech-2anisms such as whitecapping, bottom friction, and depth-induced break-ing [7–11]. In addition, nonlinear wave–wave interactions redistribute energy across the spectrum, and wave–current interactions further modify wave evo-lution [9, 12]. These processes are strongly influenced by environmental fac-tors, including local bathymetry, coastline geometry, and spatially varying wind conditions. As a result, wave evolution is governed by strong nonlinear couplings across physical and spectral scales. This complexity significantly increases the computational cost of numerical wave simulation, particularly in coupled wave-current modeling frameworks. At the mathematical level, this complexity is reflected in the form of the governing equations used in spectral wave models. The governing equations of spectral wave models, i.e., the WABE, are high-dimensional partial differential equations that describe the evolution of wave action density in both physical and spectral space. Typically, these equations are numerically approximated using finite difference, finite element, and finite volume methods to simulate wave propagation over large spatial domains. The development of one of the earliest such models, the WAve Model (WAM), began in the early 1970s and evolved through three gener-ations, as summarized by the WAMDI Group [13]. First-generation mod-els prescribed spectral shapes with empirical growth laws, whereas second-generation models partially evolved the spectrum but required imposed con-straints on nonlinear interactions. In third-generation models, the wave ac-tion density is computed at each computational grid point, greatly enhanc-ing accuracy and physical consistency. However, this increased fidelity also leads to higher computational cost, which remains a challenge for large-scale problems. There are many historical review articles [14, 15] that summarize the methods employed in contemporary numerical spectral wind wave mod-els, including some of the most well-known models used in practice such as ECWAM [16], SWAN [17], and WAVEWATCH III [18]. The persistent computational burden in these third-generation wave mod-els has motivated growing interest in alternative, data-driven modeling strate-gies that can retain physical fidelity while enabling rapid prediction. These methods leverage the increasing availability of data and advances in machine learning to enhance traditional modeling techniques. In [19], the authors ar-gued that most studies applying machine learning to ocean wave height pre-diction focus on single-point predictions. For problems in two-dimensional (2-D) spatial domains, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) are popular due to their ability to learn relevant spatial correlations in image-type data 3on regular grids [20]. CNNs have been shown to be successful in predicting the significant wave height (Hsig) for both regional ocean and experimen-tal study domains, with rectangular geometries and regular computational meshes [21–23]. For a specific coastal domain of the North Sea using SWAN-generated wave fields as ground truth, CNN-based surrogate models achieved an average spatial root mean square error (RMSE) of 0.097 m for Hsig [19]. In addition to CNNs, Feed-Forward Neural Networks and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks have also been applied to predict the time series of Hsig evolution for station-based locations [24, 25]. Despite these successes, existing data-driven approaches face several fun-damental limitations when applied to realistic coastal wave modeling prob-lems. CNN-based models are not directly applicable to complex geometries or unstructured meshes. Moreover, their inference capability is inherently restricted to the same spatial discretization and grid configuration as the training data. LSTM-based models typically also suffer from this limita-tion as they often require a spatial embedding of the data for computational efficiency or are restricted to point-based predictions. In contrast, Deep Operator Networks (DeepONets) belong to a specialized class of deep neural network-based architectures known as neural operators, that are designed to approximate mappings between infinite-dimensional functional spaces [26], and are inherently independent of the spatial dis-cretization of the output function. These properties enable neural operator frameworks such as DeepONets to efficiently approximate the solution op-erator of complex PDEs. Hence, DeepONet-based architectures have been tremendously successful in a wide array of computational science and engi-neering applications [27–31]. In the context of ocean and wave modeling, the application of DeepONet to model high-raft wave energy converter (WEC) by Zhang et al. [32] was the first study to demonstrate the feasibility and superiority of operator learning in predicting the response of floating struc-tures. Subsequently, Cao et al. [33] investigated the capability of three neu-ral operator architectures — DeepONets, Fourier Neural Operator (FNO), and Wavelet Neural Operator (WNO) to model floating offshore structures under irregular ocean waves, and also found that DeepONets with histori-cal states performed best for broadband and transient responses. Zhang et al. [34] applied a variant of DeepONet called the Multiple-Input Operator Network (MIONet) to successfully simulate the nonlinear dynamic response of a bistable WEC driven by an irregular wave elevation time series. Zheng et al. [35] used multi-scale FNO for phase-resolved wave prediction from radar 4observations and achieved a 14% reduction in prediction mean absolute er-ror compared to the standard FNO. Zhang et al. [36] utilized the DeepONet framework to predict future wave heights using historical wave height data. In a controlled laboratory wave basin setup, their model showed impressive accuracy in short-term prediction horizons over a range of sea states (WC01-WC04), and outperformed an LSTM-based wave prediction model by about 

30% across both short- and medium-term prediction horizons. This study aims to explore and demonstrate the applicability of the Deep-ONet framework as a data-driven surrogate for spectral wind wave models like SWAN, that can accurately approximate the relationship of wind forcing and initial wave conditions with the steady-state conditions of the sea surface in realistic coastal domains. In particular, this study investigates the feasi-bility of using DeepONets to predict signification wave height and radiation stress gradients, two key variables used to characterize the sea state in spec-tral wave models and quantify wave-current interactions in numerical models of the tightly coupled wave-current system, such as the SWAN+ADCIRC model [5]. Despite the similarity in the model architecture with [36], there are several key differences in the conceptual design and function. Unlike in [36], where a DeepONet is used to learn the time series of wave height evolu-tion using historical wave height observations, this study focuses on learning the relationship between the steady-state wave state and the driving factors behind it such as initial conditions, boundary conditions, and body forces. First, this enables the proposed modeling framework to accurately represent a wide range of ambient environmental conditions. Second, this modeling framework more closely emulates the solution operator underlying spectral wind wave models such as SWAN, particularly in steady-state mode, and would, therefore, admit a natural extension to a surrogate wave model that can be deployed in a coupled wave-current system in the future. Moreover, the proposed framework preserves DeepONet’s property of discretization in-variance in the output function space, and thus could be used to predict sig-nificant wave height and gradient of radiation stresses even at locations not included in the computational mesh of the numerical wave model-generated training data. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the physical background and numerical framework, including the SWAN wave model, wave-current coupling, and the DeepONet architecture used to learn nonlinear mappings from wind and wave conditions to spatially distributed wave quantities. Section 3 defines the multi-scale performance indicators 5used to evaluate the surrogate, from global scenario-based metrics to node-wise spatial error distributions. Section 4 presents numerical results for three examples: a one-dimensional (1-D) domain with uniform-slope bathymetry, a 2-D domain with planar slope, and a 2-D realistic coastal domain (DUCK), based on experiments conducted at the Field Research Facility (FRF) of the U.S. Army Engineer Research Development Center’s Coastal and Hy-draulics Laboratory, located in Duck, North Carolina [37], and which has been included in the SWAN testbed [38]. Section 5 discusses the physical interpretability of the surrogate model, and Section 6 summarizes the main finding and outlines directions for future work. 

2. Methods 

2.1. Problem Definition 

The physical quantities of interest in this study are (a) the significant wave height, which represents a phase-averaged statistical measure for es-timating the evolution and dissipation of the wave energy, and (b) the ra-diation stress gradients, which represent the wave-induced momentum flux transferred from surface waves to the current. Using significant wave height (Hsig) as a modeled output for a spectral wave surrogate model is highly effective because it provides a low-dimensional, high-signal representation of complex spectral data, making it easier for machine learning architectures to converge on physically consistent results. Additionally, since Hsig is the in-dustry standard for coastal risk assessment and defines non-linear thresholds like wave breaking, modeling it directly ensures that the surrogate provides immediate, actionable insights for engineering and validation. On the other hand, in coupled wave-current models such as SWAN+ADCIRC, radiation stress gradients appear in the current model (ADCIRC) as an additional forcing term. These gradients are computed by SWAN from the wave field and supplied to ADCIRC, as detailed in the supplementary information. SWAN solves the wave action balance equation (WABE) defined as: 

∂N ∂t + ∇⃗x ·

h

(⃗c g +⃗ U )N

i

+ ∂c θN∂θ + ∂c σN∂σ = Sσ . (1) Here, N (σ, θ, x, y, t ) represents the action density spectrum, which quantifies the wave energy per unit frequency and direction. It is defined as N = Eσ ,where E denotes the energy density of the waves, and σ is the relative fre-quency. On the left-hand side, the first term captures the rate of change of the 6action density over time. The second term is the spatial propagation term, which represents the propagation of the action density in the geographic space ⃗x with wave group velocity c g and ambient current vector ⃗ U . The third term is the spectral propagation term, which represents depth-induced / current-induced refraction with propagation velocity cθ in terms of relative frequency 

σ, and the fourth term is change in the relative frequency due to variations in depth and currents with propagation velocity cσ in terms of propagation direction θ. The source term on the right-hand side represents the com-bined effects of wind energy input, nonlinear wave-wave interactions, and various dissipation processes. SWAN incorporates these source terms using empirical formulations as documented in the SWAN Scientific and Technical Documentation [1, 39] To simulate the complex interactions between waves and circulation in coastal environments, SWAN is often coupled with ADCIRC, which is a state-of-the-art high-performance numerical model used to simulate free-surface circulation, tides, and storm surge in coastal environments. ADCIRC [40] solves a form of the 2-D shallow water equations, where the continuity equa-tion is reformulated as a generalized wave continuity equation [41]. The re-sulting system of equations is solved using a Bubnov-Galerkin finite element method [42] with linear polynomial basis functions. Within the generalized wave continuity and momentum equations, radiation stress gradients appear explicitly as additional forcing terms that modify the momentum balance, thereby representing the net effect of wave-induced forcing on the current field. Therefore, at each coupling step, SWAN updates the wave spectrum pointwise across the spatial computational grid and derives the associated radiation stress. Because this process involves solving a high-dimensional spectral problem under dynamically updated circulation conditions across a large geographic domain, the computational cost of running SWAN at every coupling time step is expensive. This study investigates the feasibility of using DeepONet not only to serve as a surrogate model for SWAN by estimating bulk parameters such as Hsig, but also to improve the efficiency of predicting radiation stress gradients without compromising accuracy under varying conditions. 

2.2. Operator Formulation 

The training and testing data for this study are generated from SWAN simulations of three distinct numerical examples. In order to focus on the 7feasibility of learning the nonlinear functional map from the wind and ini-tial wave conditions to the fully developed wave state, steady-state SWAN simulations are utilized for all numerical examples in this study. This is a common practice in coastal engineering studies to reduce computational cost and is appropriate for wave conditions that vary more slowly than the time it takes for waves to propagate through the domain or to attain fetch-limited or fully developed conditions [43]. A Joint North Sea Wave Project (JON-SWAP) spectrum [44] is prescribed at the boundary, and wave height and peak wave direction are considered input variables. The wind field (wind direction and wind velocities) across the domain is also considered as input for the surrogate model. From a systems perspective, the numerical solution of the steady-state wave action balance equation can be abstracted as an operator that maps boundary wave conditions and forcing to the resulting wave action density spectrum over the computational domain. Specifically, we represent SWAN as a nonlinear operator: 

GS :  Nbnd , U10 ) 7 −→ N (σ, θ, x, y ), (2) where N (σ, θ, x, y ) denotes the wave action density spectrum in the spectral space (σ, θ ) and the physical space (x, y ). Here, Nbnd denotes the prescribed boundary wave action spectrum and U10 (x, y ) represents the wind field. 

2.3. DeepONet Architecture 

DeepONet is an operator learning framework proposed by Lu et al. [26], based on the universal approximation theorem for operators [45]. Unlike traditional deep neural networks that approximate mappings between finite-dimensional tensors, DeepONets are designed to approximate a nonlinear mapping between two infinite-dimensional function spaces, which we denote as: ˆG : U 7 → V , where U represents the space of input functions and V

denotes the space of output functions. In the context of physics-based modeling, the target operator G is implic-itly defined by the governing equations of the underlying system. Operator learning aims at building an approximation ˆG(θ) : U 7 → V , θ being the parameters of the neural operator, such that ˆG(u, θ) ≈ G (u) for any input function u ∈ U . In practical applications, the training data consist of input– output function pairs (u(x), v (y)) , where u ∈ U and v ∈ V , evaluated at discrete coordinates x ∈ X and y ∈ Y . Consequently, the operator mapping can be interpreted pointwise such that v(y) = ˆG(u)( x).8To efficiently approximate this operator, the DeepONet architecture uti-lizes two sub-networks: a branch network f and a trunk network g, each responsible for encoding a different aspect of the operator, as illustrated in Figure 1. The branch network encodes the input function u, which can correspond to initial conditions, boundary conditions, or other forcing inputs, through its evaluations at a set of representative sampling points {xi ∈ X } mi=1 , given by {u1 = u(x1), u 2 = u(x2), . . . , u m = u(xm)}. The output of the branch network is a feature vector b ∈ Rp. The trunk network, on the other hand, encodes the coordinates y ∈ Y at which the output function is evaluated. Its output is a feature vector t ∈ Rp, with the same dimensionality as the out-put of the branch network. The DeepONet framework admits the flexibility of choosing the neural network architectures for the branch and the trunk networks according to the requirements of the application. The branch and trunk network outputs are combined through an inner product to produce an approximation of the output function value at the specified coordinate. The loss function is defined as the mean squared error between the predicted values and the corresponding ground-truth values at the queried coordinates. By minimizing the loss function during training, the surrogate model learns an accurate approximation of the underlying physical operator. Consequently, the DeepONet framework allows evaluation of the learned operator at arbitrary coordinates, independent of the training mesh. 

2.4. Numerical Examples 

This study investigates the application of DeepONet for wave simula-tion using three distinct numerical examples. The first two examples involve simplified configurations based on a one-dimensional (1-D) domain and its extension to a two-dimensional (2-D) domain, in which the bathymetry is modeled as a uniform slope. These simplified examples serve as controlled environments for examining DeepONet’s ability to learn fundamental aspects of wave propagation. The third example is derived from the F71 test case in the ONR Test Bed [38], which is designed to be a benchmark for wave models in near-shore field experiments with depth-induced breaking. The F71 test case also includes real-world pressure gage data from the DELILAH near-shore experiment (Duck Experiment on Low-frequency and Incident-band Longshore and Acrossshore Hydrodynamics), which took place in the Field Research Facility (RFR), located on the shores of the Atlantic Ocean in Duck, North Carolina, USA. The steady-state numerical example derived 9Figure 1: Conceptual overview of the DeepONet architecture for wave modeling. For each wave–wind scenario, boundary wave information and wind forcing are encoded by the branch network, while spatial coordinates are provided to the trunk network. The learned operator maps scenario-level forcing to spatially resolved wave fields, approximating the SWAN solution operator. Ground-truth wave fields from SWAN are used to supervise training through a point-wise loss function. 

from this test case, henceforth referred to as the DUCK example, provides 10 validation for applying DeepONets to realistic coastal environments. Unlike the simplified 1-D and 2-D uniform-slope bathymetries, the DUCK example involves the real-world bathymetry of the FRF area, complex boundary con-ditions, and realistic coastal wind conditions. Together, these three numerical examples provide an extensive evaluation framework, ranging from idealized configurations to a realistic coastal environment, to assess the capability and generalization properties of the proposed DeepONet surrogate. For all the examples, SWAN simulations are first performed to gener-ate the training and testing datasets. To ensure data quality, the following convergence criteria are applied to each simulation. SWAN terminates the iterations when the relative change and curvature conditions of Hsig are sat-isfied, and these criteria hold true for more than 99 .5% of the wet grid points. If a simulation does not reach the convergence criterion within 50 iterations, it is excluded from the data set. 

2.5. Model Architecture Setup 

Each simulation scenario is parameterized using four physical variables that represent the ambient wind and wave conditions: wind speed and wind direction, which act as domain-wide forcing, and wave height and wave direc-tion, which prescribe the incoming wave conditions at the boundary. These are transformed into suitable input features for the branch network. Wind speed and direction are combined together to be expressed as the x- and y-components of wind velocity, and each component is scaled between −1 and 

1 using the maximum and minimum values of the training set. The wave height is scaled between 0 and 1 based on its maximum and minimum val-ues in the training set. Finally, the mean wave direction, θbnd , is expressed using its sine and cosine components. Consequently, the following five input features, namely the x-and y-direction wind components ( Ux and Uy, respec-tively), the initial wave height at the boundary ( Hbnd ), and the components of the mean wave direction ( cos( θbnd ), sin( θbnd )) are combined to generate the input vector of the branch network as: 

u = Ux, U y, H bnd , cos( θbnd ), sin( θbnd ). (3) The branch network therefore encodes scenario-level forcing information. In contrast, the trunk network samples spatial coordinates (x, y ) in the computational domain at which the quantities of interest (Hsig and forces) are being sought. These coordinates are independently scaled to the range 11 [0 , 1] in both dimensions. For generating the training data, about 5% of the total number of spatial coordinates is randomly sampled from each simulation scenario, and the model is trained to approximate the quantities of interest evaluated at these sampled spatial locations. Within this framework, the DeepONet is trained to learn a nonlinear operator that maps forcing conditions to spatially resolved wave responses. Specifically, the DeepONet approximates the operator: 

ˆG : (u, x) 7 −→ q(x), (4) where x = ( x, y ) denotes the spatial coordinates provided to the trunk net-work, and q(x) represents the target wave quantities of interest, including Hsig and radiation stress–related forces. The network output is given by: 

ˆq(x) = 

> p

X

> i=1

bi(u) ti(x), (5) where [b1(·), b 2(·), . . . , b p(·)] T ∈ Rp and [t1(·), t 2(·), . . . , t p(·)] T ∈ Rp denote the p-dimensional outputs of the branch and trunk networks, respectively. Here p is a model hyperparameter that is optimized during training. Finally, the model is trained by minimizing the mean-squared error be-tween the predicted outputs ˆq(x) and the corresponding ground-truth values at the Ns randomly sampled spatial locations {xi}Ns

> i=1

, as given by, 

L = 1

NsNsX

> i=1

∥ˆq(xi) − q(xi)∥22 . (6) Minimizing this loss ensures that the DeepONet learns the functional map-ping between boundary wave conditions, wind forcing, and the resulting wave quantities governed by the underlying physical processes. To ensure an effective model configuration while controlling computa-tional cost, Optuna [46], an open-source hyperparameter optimization frame-work, is adopted to identify optimal hyperparameter configurations for Deep-ONet models approximating wave height and gradient of radiation forces for the first 1-D numerical example (see Section 2.4). These optimal configura-tions are summarized in Table 1, and further details of the Optuna search space are provided in the supplementary information. Due to the similarity in the model architecture, the hyperparameter optimization process is car-ried out only once for each model of the 1-D numerical example, and the 12 Hyperparameter Wave Prediction Model Forces Prediction Model                           

> General  Initial Learning Rate 10 −310 −4
> Batch Size 256 64 ∗
> Branch/Trunk Output Shape 20 30 Branch  Number of Layers 44Neurons Per Layer 16 128 Activation Function elu LeakyReLU Regularizer none none Initializer he normal glorot uniform Trunk  Number of Layers 55Neurons Per Layer 96 96 Activation Function Relu tanh Regularizer none none Initializer glorot uniform he normal

Table 1: The best-performing set of hyperparameters obtained from Optuna.  

> ∗

A larger batch size (256) was used for the DUCK case to reduce computational overhead, as smaller batch sizes resulted in excessive training cost. 

resulting set of “optimal” hyperparameters are then also used to train the corresponding models for the 2-D and DUCK examples. Repeating the hy-perparameter optimization study for each of the models in all three examples would have incurred substantial computational costs, and hence is avoided, as preliminary experiments indicated only marginal performance gains. 

3. Performance Indicators 

The performance of the proposed DeepONet surrogate model framework is evaluated using a range of error metrics. These include scenario-based metrics, which characterize the model’s performance across a set of unseen test scenarios through spatially-aggregated assessments, and node-wise met-rics, which measure the spatial error distribution for each test scenario to analyze the local fidelity of model predictions. 

3.1. Scenario-based Metrics 

To provide a scale-independent assessment for each test scenario, the relative L2 error is adopted to measure the normalized discrepancy between 13 the predicted and ground-truth fields: 

RLE (s) = ∥ ˆH(s) − H(s)∥2

∥H(s)∥2

=

qPNk=1 ( ˆH(s) 

> k

− H(s) 

> k

)2

qPNk=1 (H(s) 

> k

)2

, (7) where ˆH(s) 

> k

denotes the DeepONet predicted value at spatial node k for sce-nario s, H(s) 

> k

denotes the corresponding ground-truth value simulated by the SWAN solver, and N denotes the total number of spatial nodes in the com-putational domain. Moreover, the scenario-based mean absolute error (MAE) and scenario-based root mean square error (RMSE) are defined as: 

M AE (s) = 1

N

> N

X

> k=1

H(s) 

> k

− ˆH(s) 

> k

, (8) 

RM SE (s) =

vuut 1

N

> N

X

> k=1



H(s) 

> k

− ˆH(s)

> k

2

. (9) Furthermore, we define the scenario-based maximum AE to capture the high-est point-wise error for a given scenario s:

AE (s) 

> M

= max 

> k

ˆH(s) 

> k

− H(s) 

> k

. (10) The subscript M is adopted here to denote the maximum value within a specific scenario. 

3.2. Node-wise Spatial Metrics 

Although scenario-based metrics provide an overview of the model reli-ability, they do not resolve the spatial distribution of errors. To assess the surrogate’s performance across the physical domain, the node-wise absolute error (AE) at node k is defined as: 

AE k = ˆHk − Hk . (11) In addition, the node-wise relative L2 error at node k for the sth scenario is computed as: 

RLE (s) 

> k

= AE k

∥H(s)∥2

(12) 14 These node-wise error metrics reveal where the largest prediction discrep-ancies occur within the spatial domain, providing insight into whether the DeepONet struggles in particular regions (e.g., nearshore zones, boundaries, or around steep bathymetric gradients). 

4. Numerical Experiments and Results 

4.1. 1-D Example 

As a first step, we evaluate the performance of the proposed DeepONet surrogate using an idealized 1-D example with uniform-slope bathymetry, which provides a controlled setting for assessing basic wave propagation and transformation behavior. As shown in Figure 2, the depth decreases linearly from 40 m to zero in the x-direction across a distance of 38 km, resulting in a bathymetry gradient of approximately 0.11, corresponding to an inclination angle of approximately 6.3◦.    

> Figure 2: Schematic diagram of the 1-D example. The initial wave starts at x= 0 and propagates along the positive x-axis.

Based on this simplified geometric configuration, 2401 parametric scenar-ios are simulated using SWAN by varying the wind speed, wind direction, initial wave height, and wave direction. The wind speed is constant over the domain and ranges from 11 m/s to 17 m/s, with 1 m/s increments. The wind direction varies from −7◦ to 7◦, with the positive x-axis defined as 0◦, and angles measured counterclockwise from the positive x-axis. The initial wave height ranges from 0.6 m to 1.2 m, with 0.1 m increments, and the initial wave direction ranges from −7◦ to 7◦. The JONSWAP spectrum is applied 15 at the offshore boundary at x = 0 , and the wave propagates along the posi-tive x-direction. The JONSWAP spectrum is defined with a peak period of 

3.5 s and a directional spreading power of 2.0. This parametric dataset is split into 1,680 scenarios for training, 360 for validation, and 361 for testing (a 70-15-15 split). To ensure a proper distribution and prevent bias in the dataset, the scenarios are shuffled before being split. Figure 3 and Figure 4 summarize the performance of the DeepONet mod-els for significant wave height and forces, respectively. The histograms illus-trate the distribution of RLE (s) across the entire test set. For significant wave height (Figure 3(a)), the errors are tightly clustered between 0.1% and 

0.4% . This indicates that the surrogate performs consistently throughout the parameter space. Although the relative L2 errors for the forces (Figure 4(a)) are marginally higher in magnitude, the model achieves a RLE (s) below 5% 

for the majority of scenarios. Based on the relative L2 errors, three test scenarios with the lowest errors and three with the highest errors are chosen as the best and worst scenarios, respectively, for both significant wave height and forces. As shown in the par-ity plots in Figures 3(b-d) and Figures 4(b-d), the best scenarios demonstrate near-perfect alignment between the true and predicted values for significant wave height and forces, respectively. In the worst scenarios, significant wave height predictions remain well-aligned (Figures 3(e-g)); however, the forces exhibit a marginally higher degree of deviation (Figures 4(e-g)). The three worst scenarios of each variable are selected to compute their Max-AE, MAE and RMSE. The corresponding performance metrics and the details of the scenarios are presented in Table 2 and Table 3, respectively. 

Variable Scenario 1 RLE (s)(%) AE (s) 

> M

MAE (s) RMSE (s)

Hsig 1H1 0.72 1.61 × 10 −2 7.00 × 10 −3 8.31 × 10 −3

1H2 0.54 1.54 × 10 −2 5.50 × 10 −3 7.13 × 10 −3

1H3 0.47 1.11 × 10 −2 4.40 × 10 −3 5.71 × 10 −3

Forces 1X1 6.41 2.98 × 10 −2 4.85 × 10 −3 8.03 × 10 −3

1X2 5.67 2.47 × 10 −2 2.58 × 10 −3 5.07 × 10 −3

1X3 5.65 3.66 × 10 −2 3.47 × 10 −3 7.13 × 10 −3  

> Table 2: Error metrics of the three worst-performing scenarios for each variable in the 1-D example, identified by the three highest RLE (s)magnitudes across all test cases.

16 Figure 3: Analysis of Hsig prediction errors for the 1-D example. (a) Histogram of scenario-based relative L2 errors across all test scenarios. (b-g) Parity plots comparing predicted and ground-truth values for the three best-performing scenarios (middle row) and the three worst-performing scenarios (bottom row), where the dashed diagonal lines indicate ideal agreement. 

> 1

Scenarios are labeled using the format N1V N 2, where: N1 represents the example (1: 1-D, 2: 2-D, 3: Duck), V represents the variable (H: Hsig, X: X-forces, Y: Y-forces), and 

N2 represents the severity rank (1: worst, 2: second worst, 3: third worst). For example, 

17 Figure 4: Analysis of Forces prediction errors for the 1-D example. (a) Histogram of scenario-based relative L2 errors across all test scenarios. (b-g) Parity plots comparing predicted and ground-truth values for the three best-performing scenarios (middle row) and the three worst-performing scenarios (bottom row), where the dashed diagonal lines indicate ideal agreement. 

To further assess model robustness, we next examine the worst-performing 

“1H3” represents the scenario with the third highest relative L2 error in predicting Hsig for the 1-D example. 

18 Variable Scenario Wind Wind Dir Wave H. Wave Dir Hsig 1H1 11 -7.0 0.9 6.0 1H2 13 -4.0 0.6 0.0 1H3 11 -7.0 1.2 6.0 

Forces 1X1 15 -7.0 0.6 7.0 1X2 12 0.0 1.2 0.0 1X3 15 -6.0 1.0 7.0 

> Table 3: Configurations of the three worst-performing scenarios reported in Table 2. Wind speed is given in m/s, wave height in m, and directional quantities in degrees.

scenarios for each variable, i.e. 1H1 and 1X1 (see Table 2). Figure 5 compares the model predictions for the significant wave height and the wave-induced forces with the SWAN simulation results. For significant wave height, the worst scenario occurs for an initial wave height of 0.9 m with a direction of 6◦, and a wind speed of 11 m/s with a direction of −7◦ (see Table 3). The DeepONet predictions are closely aligned with the SWAN results (see Figure 5(a)), and the highest magnitude of the node-wise relative L2 error ( RLE k) is 0.07% , which occurs at x = 2 .8×10 4 mwith a significant wave height of 1.30 m, as the wave begins to decay. For wave-induced forces, the worst scenario involves an initial wave height of 0.6 m with a direction of 7◦, and a wind speed of 15 m/s with a direction of −7◦ (see Table 3). The highest RLE k of 1.22% occurs at x = 3 .18 × 10 4m,which corresponds to a point of sharp increase in the forces as the wave approaches the nearshore environment, and where the true value simulated by SWAN is −5.98 ×10 −2 N/m 2. As illustrated in Figure 5(b), the SWAN output exhibits a localized, sharp gradient, but the DeepONet model produces a smoother transition. Despite this tendency to regularize sharp gradients in the predicted field, Figures 4 and Figures 5 suggest that the DeepONet surrogate for the forces captures the general trend of the solution and achieves a high degree of accuracy in the majority of the spatial domain, even for the worst test scenarios. 

4.2. 2-D Example 

The 2-D test example is an extension of the 1-D example to a 38 km ×

40 km domain, where the bathymetry is modeled as a uniform slope, with the depth decreasing linearly from 40 m to zero along the x-direction, as shown 19 Figure 5: Comparison between SWAN and DeepONet for the worst-case scenarios in the 1-D example. The top panel shows the Hsig prediction and the bottom panel shows the wave-induced forces prediction. 

in Figure 6. Wind speed and direction are kept constant throughout the domain. The JONSWAP spectrum is introduced at the left boundary, i.e., 20 x = 0 . It is defined with a peak period of 3.5 s and a directional spreading power of 2.0.   

> Figure 6: Bathymetry field of the 2-D example. The initial wave starts at the left boundary (x= 0 ) and propagates towards the shore along the right boundary ( x= 38 km).

Based on this 2-D geometric configuration, a broader range of wind and wave conditions is considered to introduce directional variability and more complex wave-bathymetry interactions. All directions are defined in the hori-zontal plane, where the positive x-axis is taken as 0◦, and angles are measured counterclockwise. The wind speed ranges from 14 m/s to 20 m/s, with 1 m/s increments. The wind direction, as measured from the positive x-axis, takes the values −70 ◦, −60 ◦, −45 ◦, 0◦, 45 ◦, 60 ◦, and 75 ◦ (see Figure 6). The initial wave height varies from 0.4 m to 1.0 m, with increments of 0.1 m, and the wave direction is selected from the same set of directional angles as the wind field. After filtering out non-converged cases, the 2-D example is randomly split into 1, 650 scenarios for training, 344 for validation, and 345 for testing. The performance across the test set is summarized in Figures 7, 8, and 9. The histograms showing the distributions of RLE (s) for all test scenarios (Figures 7(a), 8(a), and 9(a)) confirm that the DeepONet models remain spatially consistent over a wide range of unseen parametric variations, even for the 2-D example. For the significant wave height, RLE (s) magnitudes typically range between 0.2% and 0.6% , with a maximum value of 0.12% .For the x-direction forces, the errors typically range between 1.5% and 3% ,with a 8.78% relative error for the worst-performing scenario. Similarly, for 21 the y-direction forces, the errors typically lie between 2.5% and 4% , with a maximum error of 8.74% . For the y-forces, scenarios where the wind direction is 0◦ (i.e., the wind is perpendicular to the y-axis) are excluded from the testing set, as the SWAN solutions in these cases are dominated by numerical noise. Analysis of the parity plots reveals that the scenarios with the lowest mag-nitudes of RLE (s) for all three variables (Figures 7(b-d), 8(b-d), and 9(b-d)) exhibit near-perfect agreement between the predicted and true values. How-ever, the parity plots for the scenarios with the highest RLE (s) magnitudes for the Hsig model (Figure 7(e-g)) exhibit different trends than those of the force components (Figures 8(e-g) and 9(e-g)). Although the Hsig predictions remain well-aligned even for the worst-performing scenario (Figure 7(e)), the force predictions in the worst-performing scenarios show a higher degree of deviation from the true values, and consequently an increase in the RLE (s)

values, in comparison to the 1-D example. This drop in accuracy compared to the 1-D example could be attributed to the more complex physical pro-cesses of the 2-D example, such as lateral refraction and multidirectional wave-current interactions. Nevertheless, a maximum RLE (s) of 8.78% across all three variables and over a diverse range of unseen test scenarios highlights the strong predictive skills and generalization capabilities of the DeepONet models. To further assess the robustness of the models, the three worst-performing test scenarios for each variable are selected to compute their AE MM , M AE M ,and RM SE M . The corresponding error metrics and the scenario configu-rations are presented in Tables 4 and 5, respectively. Among the identified worst-performing cases, the scenarios associated with the largest RLE (s) for each variable, i.e., 2H1, 2X1, and 2Y1, were selected for detailed spatial comparison between SWAN and DeepONet. As shown in Figure 10, the maximum node-wise relative L2 error, RLE k

of the Hsig prediction (first row of Figure 10) is 0.11% , which occurs at a node with Hsig of 1.03 m. Similarly, the maximum RLE k for the x-direction force (second row of Figure 10) is 0.77% , which occurs at a x-forces value of 

0.217 N/m 2, while the maximum RLE k for the y-direction force (third row of Figure 10) is 0.932% , which occurs at a y-forces value of 0.142 N/m 2.Across all three DeepONet models, the largest RLE k magnitudes appear in the nearshore region, where the bottom depth starts impacting the wave propagation. As waves shoal over the sloping bathymetry, radiation stresses undergo stronger spatial gradients, amplifying local sensitivities to model 22 Figure 7: Analysis of Hsig prediction errors for the 2-D example. (a) Histogram of scenario-based relative L2 errors across all test scenarios. (b-g) Parity plots comparing predicted and ground-truth values for the three best-performing scenarios (middle row) and the three worst-performing scenarios (bottom row), where the dashed diagonal lines indicate ideal agreement. 

23 Figure 8: Analysis of x-forces prediction errors for the 2-D example. (a) Histogram of scenario-based relative L2 errors across all test scenarios. (b-g) Parity plots comparing predicted and ground-truth values for the three best-performing scenarios (middle row) and the three worst-performing scenarios (bottom row), where the dashed diagonal lines indicate ideal agreement. 

24 Figure 9: Analysis of y-forces prediction errors for the 2-D example. (a) Histogram of scenario-based relative L2 errors across all test scenarios. (b-g) Parity plots comparing predicted and ground-truth values for the three best-performing scenarios (middle row) and the three worst-performing scenarios (bottom row), where the dashed diagonal lines indicate ideal agreement. Note: Scenarios where the wind directions are aligned with the x-axis (angle = 0 ◦) are excluded as the near-zero y-force values are dominated by numerical noise. 

25 Variable Scenario RLE (s)(%) AE (s) 

> M

MAE (s) RMSE (s)

Hsig 2H1 1.23 6.43 × 10 −2 1.48 × 10 −2 1.85 × 10 −2

2H2 1.12 5.64 × 10 −2 1.42 × 10 −2 1.79 × 10 −2

2H3 1.05 6.00 × 10 −2 1.51 × 10 −2 1.85 × 10 −2

x-force 2X1 8.78 2.37 × 10 −2 3.50 × 10 −3 6.93 × 10 −3

2X2 8.27 2.83 × 10 −2 4.12 × 10 −3 7.92 × 10 −3

2X3 7.36 2.60 × 10 −2 4.24 × 10 −3 7.60 × 10 −3

y-force 2Y1 8.74 1.73 × 10 −2 2.56 × 10 −3 4.17 × 10 −3

2Y2 8.69 1.74 × 10 −2 2.46 × 10 −3 4.09 × 10 −3

2Y3 4.68 1.11 × 10 −2 1.73 × 10 −3 2.84 × 10 −3  

> Table 4: Error metrics of the three worst-performing scenarios for each variable in the 2-D example, identified by the three highest RLE (s)magnitudes across all test cases.

approximation. Because the bathymetry is uniform along the y-direction, the error patterns remain laterally coherent, producing similar nearshore error bands across all three predicted variables. Despite this localized increase, the overall node-wise relative L2 error remains small, demonstrating that the DeepONet models maintain predictive accuracy in the full 2-D domain and across the wide range of forcing conditions represented in the test scenarios. 

4.3. DUCK Example 

In the DUCK example, the bathymetry and computational grid are set up in the same way as described in the test case F71 of the ONR Test Bed [38], and as illustrated in Figure 11. A constant wind field is applied across the computational domain, and initial wave conditions are imposed on the northeast boundary. In the original F71 test case, this condition is based on a spectrum derived from field observations, whereas in our example we use a JONSWAP spectrum with a peak period of 10.718 s and a direc-tional spreading power of 2.0. Within this spectrum, we vary only the initial wave’s significant wave height and direction. In addition, two fixed lateral wave conditions are prescribed on the north-west and south-east boundaries, consistent with the original F71 test case setup. The lateral boundary condi-tions are prescribed with an Hsig of 1.63 m, a peak period of 10 .5 s, a mean direction of 88 ◦, and a directional standard deviation of 22 ◦. Finally, the water level is uniformly increased by 0.11 m throughout the domain. 26 Variable Scenario Wind Wind Dir Wave H. Wave Dir Hsig 2H1 14 0 1.0 02H2 15 0 1.0 02H3 15 45 1.0 0

x-force 2X1 14 -60 0.7 -60 2X2 15 -60 0.4 -45 2X3 15 60 1.0 60 

y-force 2Y1 15 60 1.0 60 2Y2 15 -60 0.4 -45 2Y3 14 -60 0.7 -60 

> Table 5: Configurations of the three worst-performing scenarios for each variable in the 2-D example, as reported in Table 4. Wind speed is given in m/s, wave height in m, and directional quantities in degrees.

Based on this set up, a parametric set of wind and wave conditions is considered. The wind speed ranges from 1 m/s to 8 m/s, with 1 m/s incre-ments. The wind direction, which is reported as the direction from which it originates and is measured in cardinal (or compass) direction with the positive y-axis (true North) set as 0◦, ranges from 0◦ to 315 ◦, with 45 ◦ in-crements, as shown in Figure 11. The initial wave height varies from 1.6 mto 2.6 m, with 0.2 m increments, and the initial wave direction ranges from 

−20 ◦ to 160 ◦ in increments of 20 ◦. A total of 3, 840 scenarios are generated using SWAN, of which 2, 688 are randomly allocated for training, 576 for validation, and 576 for testing (70-15-15 split). Compared to the idealized 1-D and 2-D examples, this configuration incorporates realistic bathymetry and complex boundary interactions, providing a physically relevant test for the proposed surrogate. The performance analyses of the DeepONet surrogate models for Hsig and the x- and y-forces are presented in Figures 12, 13 and 14, respectively. De-spite the highly irregular seabed features, the RLE (s) distributions confirm that the models maintain strong global consistency. For Hsig predictions, the 

RLE (s) values (see Figure 12(a)) are below 1.0% for the majority of test sce-narios. Although this is a minor increase compared to the idealized 1-D and 2-D examples, it remains remarkably low for a real-world field application. The RLE (s) for the x-direction forces (see Figure 13(a)) typically range be-tween 2% and 5% , with a maximum value of 10 .98% . The y-direction forces 27 Figure 10: Comparison of the worst-case scenarios for each variable between SWAN and DeepONet in 2-D example. Wind and wave settings are specified in Table 5. The top row (a–c) shows the ground truth, DeepONet prediction, and node-wise relative L2 error for the worst Hsig scenario, 2H1. The middle row (d–f) and bottom row (g–i) present the ground truth, DeepONet prediction, and node-wise relative L2 error for the worst x-force and y-force scenarios (2X1 and 2Y1), respectively. 

exhibit a similar distribution (see Figure 14(a)), with the majority of errors less than 3.5% and a maximum of 6.88% .Analysis of the parity plots reveals that the best-performing scenarios for all variables (Figures 12(b-d), 13(b-d) and 14(b-d)) show that the pre-dicted solutions are nearly indistinguishable from the true solutions. How-ever, the relatively higher levels of mismatch between the true and predicted solutions, seen in the parity plots of the worst-performing scenarios (Fig-ures 12(e-g), 13(e-g) and 14(e-g)) highlight the challenges posed by real-world bathymetry, as well as numerical artifacts introduced near the boundary. For example, the minimum value of the x-force solution for scenario 3X1 is ap-proximately −67 N/m 2, which occurs at a single isolated grid point on the southern boundary, whereas the next highest solution value at a grid point is −33 N/m 2. This isolated point, which is an outlier and potentially an 28 Figure 11: The left figure shows the overlap of the computational grid centers (grey) with the bathymetry (color). The computational grid extends beyond the surveyed bathymatry to minimize boundary effects. After SWAN is run, it generates the x, y coordinates along with their corresponding water depths, Hsig, and other target wave properties. The right figure illustrates the spatial distribution of water depth. 

effect of convergence issues of the numerical solution near the boundary, is excluded from the parity plot in Figure 13(e). Similarly to the previous two examples, the Hsig model demonstrates impressive performance even in the worst scenarios. The model successfully captures the overall energy dissipa-tion across the complex physical system of the DUCK example. The force predictions in the worst scenarios exhibit much more scattering than in the 1-D and 2-D cases. This increased misalignment is attributed to the much wider range of unseen flow conditions and the presence of irregular, realistic bathymetry features, which create not only a higher contrast in the magni-tude of the forces, but also localized, high-frequency spatial gradients. These effects are discussed in the following analysis. To further assess the robustness of the models, the three worst-performing test scenarios for each variable are selected to compute their AE MM , M AE M ,and RM SE M . The corresponding error metrics and the scenario configu-rations are presented in Tables 6 and 7, respectively. Given the increased physical and geometric complexity of the DUCK example, the scenarios as-sociated with the largest RLE (s) for each variable, i.e., 3H1, 3X1, and 3Y1, 29 Figure 12: Analysis of Hsig prediction errors for the DUCK test example. (a) Histogram of scenario-based relative L2 errors across all test scenarios. (b-g) Parity plots comparing predicted and ground-truth values for the three best-performing scenarios (middle row) and the three worst-performing scenarios (bottom row), where the dashed diagonal lines indicate ideal agreement. 

are selected for detailed spatial comparison between SWAN and DeepONet. As shown in Figure 15, the maximum RLE k for the significant wave height 30 Figure 13: Analysis of x-forces prediction errors for the DUCK test example. (a) Histogram of scenario-based relative L2 errors across all test scenarios. (b-g) Parity plots comparing predicted and ground-truth values for the three best-performing scenarios (middle row) and the three worst-performing scenarios (bottom row), where the dashed diagonal lines indicate ideal agreement. 

31 Figure 14: Analysis of y-forces prediction errors for the DUCK test example. (a) Histogram of scenario-based relative L2 errors across all test scenarios. (b-g) Parity plots comparing predicted and ground-truth values for the three best-performing scenarios (middle row) and the three worst-performing scenarios (bottom row), where the dashed diagonal lines indicate ideal agreement. 

32 Variable Scenario RLE (s)(%) AE (s) 

> M

MAE (s) RMSE (s)

Hsig 3H1 1.91 9.87 × 10 −2 1.44 × 10 −2 1.86 × 10 −2

3H2 1.81 9.54 × 10 −2 1.29 × 10 −2 1.75 × 10 −2

3H3 1.58 1.00 × 10 −1 1.15 × 10 −2 1.53 × 10 −2

x-forces 3X1 10.98 2.55 1.30 × 10 −1 2.54 × 10 −1

3X2 8.8 2.75 9.81 × 10 −2 2.12 × 10 −1

3X3 7.8 2.51 8.86 × 10 −2 1.85 × 10 −1

y-forces 3Y1 6.88 1.51 3.52 × 10 −2 8.69 × 10 −2

3Y2 5.30 9.13 × 10 −1 3.15 × 10 −2 6.68 × 10 −2

3Y3 5.28 7.68 × 10 −1 2.87 × 10 −2 5.44 × 10 −2   

> Table 6: Error metrics of the three worst-performing scenarios for each variable in the Duck example, identified by the three highest RLE (s)magnitudes across all test cases.

in scenario 3H1 (first row) is 0.064%, occurring at a true wave height of 0.693 

m. For the x-direction force comparison in scenario 3X1 (second row), the maximum RLE k is 0.62% , which occurs at a force of −3.25 N/m 2. As for the y-direction force prediction in scenario 3Y1 (third row), the maximum RLE k

is 0.41% , which occurs at a force of −4.35 N/m 2. Across all three predicted variables, the maximum RLE k tend to occur either in the nearshore zone, where wave transformation processes such as shoaling and breaking induce strong spatial gradients, or along the offshore boundary. This is further il-lustrated in Figure 16, which shows the maximum absolute error for each scenario in the DUCK test set. The results indicate that the largest discrep-ancies are predominantly concentrated in the nearshore region, where the complex bathymetry and wave-breaking physics introduce significant non-linearities. The results for the Duck example demonstrate that the DeepONet sur-rogate is capable of learning the underlying wave physics of a complex, real-world coastal environment. Although the irregular bathymetry increases the difficulty of predicting derivative-based quantities like forces, the global rel-ative L2 errors remain well within the acceptable thresholds for practical coastal engineering and coupled hydrodynamic modeling. 33 Variable Scenario Wind Wind Dir Wave H. Wave Dir Hsig 3H1 7 315 1.6 -20 3H2 7 90 1.6 -20 3H3 6 135 1.6 -20 

x-forces 3X1 8 0 1.6 160 3X2 7 90 1.6 -20 3X3 6 135 1.6 -20 

y-forces 3Y1 7 90 1.6 -20 3Y2 6 135 1 -20 3Y3 8 225 1.6 160  

> Table 7: Configurations of the three worst-performing scenarios for each variable in DUCK example, as reported in Table 6. Wind speed is given in m/s, wave height in m, and directional quantities in degrees.

5. Discussion 

This study evaluates the ability of DeepONets to approximate the non-linear operator that maps wind and boundary wave conditions to significant wave height and radiation-stress gradients in coastal wave models. Across progressively more complex numerical examples: 1-D uniform slope, 2-D pla-nar slope, and the realistic DUCK bathymetry; the surrogate demonstrates strong predictive skill and robust generalization. Several key insights emerge from these results. 

5.1. Model Performance Under Increasing Physical Complexity 

The DeepONet surrogate achieves high accuracy in all three cases, with errors remaining small relative to the magnitude of the target variables. The ability of the surrogate to reproduce spatial patterns in both Hsig and wave-induced forces suggests that the network successfully captures key physical processes such as shoaling and depth-induced breaking. Notably, even in the DUCK case, where bathymetry is irregular and nonlinear interactions dominate, the DeepONet surrogate models maintain consistent performance, highlighting DeepONet’s capacity to approximate operators defined on com-plex domains. Beyond global performance evaluations, understanding where and why the model struggles provides deeper insight into its physical consis-tency. 34 Figure 15: Comparison of the worst-case scenarios for each variable between SWAN and DeepONet in DUCK example. Wind and wave settings are specified in Table 7. The top row (a–c) shows the ground truth, DeepONet prediction, and relative L2 error for the worst Hsig scenario. The middle row (d–f) and bottom row (g–i) present the ground truth, DeepONet prediction, and relative L2 error for the worst x-force and y-force predictions, respectively. 

5.2. Spatial Localization of Errors and Physical Interpretability 

In every experiment, the largest absolute and mean errors occur within physically energetic regions: the surf-zone where waves experience rapid shoaling and breaking and near offshore boundaries where spectral condi-tions are imposed. These regions correspond to locations where the gov-erning equations exhibit heightened sensitivity and strong spatial gradients. The bottom row of Figure 16 further shows that the points with the highest absolute error in each test scenario consistently cluster near the shoreline, demonstrating that error amplification is not random but tied to physical 35 Figure 16: Location of the maximum absolute error of each scenario across all test scenarios 

processes. Importantly, these local error concentrations do not undermine the overall accuracy of the predictions, as they represent a small fraction of the domain and occur where SWAN solutions themselves undergo abrupt spatial transitions. A key observation across all test cases, particularly evident in the 1-D force profiles and in the Duck example, is the tendency of the DeepONet sur-rogate to smooth out localized extrema present in the SWAN output. In the Duck case, the numerical solver produces high-frequency spatial fluctuations in the radiation-stress gradients, likely resulting from small-scale bathymet-ric irregularities and numerical discretization errors. While these "jagged" patterns appear in the ground truth, the DeepONet model produces a more continuous and regularized spatial distribution. This behavior is likely attributable to spectral bias, where neural networks prioritize learning low-frequency global patterns over high-frequency local variations. In regions of sharp physical transitions, such as the sandbars in Duck, this smoothing effect results in localized increases in relative L2 error, as the surrogate fails to capture the exact magnitude of numerical "spikes." However, it is important to consider that many of these high-frequency fluctu-ations in SWAN may be numerical artifacts rather than physical signals. By providing a smoother, physically consistent gradient, the DeepONet surro-gate may actually offer a more stable forcing term for coupled hydrodynamic circulation models, which are notoriously sensitive to the high-frequency nu-merical noise often present in traditional wave model outputs. Despite these localized discrepancies in the surf zone, the surrogate’s abil-ity to capture the overarching structure of wave-induced forces facilitates its seamless integration into broader, multi-scale modeling frameworks. 36 5.3. Implications for Coupled Wave-Current Modeling 

The accurate prediction of radiation-stress gradients is particularly im-portant because these quantities directly force circulation models such as AD-CIRC. The surrogate model demonstrates the ability to approximate these gradients with high fidelity at an extremely low computational cost, on the order of 0.04 seconds per scenario, which is a nearly three-order-of magnitude speedup compared to about 30 seconds required by traditional SWAN simu-lations. This substantial reduction in computational expense highlights the potential of the proposed approach to enable efficient wave–current coupling in large-scale or ensemble-based coastal simulations. However, a primary challenge in integrating this surrogate into coupled wave–current frameworks lies in the high-frequency features present in the force gradients. While the surrogate successfully captures the underlying physical processes of wave-induced momentum flux, the "smoothing" effect of the DeepONet model may lead to discrepancies in regions where values are near zero or where the ground-truth solutions exhibit jagged, high-frequency patterns. Understanding the implications of this regularization is essential as it may influence the precision of the resulting current fields in traditional coupled modeling environments. 

5.4. Limitations and Future Work 

The DeepONet surrogate models predict bulk wave properties but not the full action density spectrum. Extending this approach to spectral outputs would increase dimensionality and require more sophisticated architectures. In light of these findings and current constraints, this work establishes a robust framework for neural operator applications in coastal engineering, the implications of which are summarized below. 

6. Conclusion 

This work demonstrates that DeepONet can serve as an efficient and accu-rate surrogate for steady-state simulations of the SWAN spectral wave model in different coastal environments. By evaluating the surrogate in 1-D, 2-D, and the realistic DUCK example, we demonstrate that the DeepONet suc-cessfully learns the nonlinear operator that maps wind and boundary wave conditions to significant wave height and gradients of radiation stress, which are quantities essential for capturing wave-current interactions in coastal sys-tems. 37 These results also highlight DeepONet’s potential to accelerate wave-current coupled modeling frameworks such as SWAN+ADCIRC. The ability to generate rapid and reliable estimates of wave-induced momentum fluxes enables new applications in operational storm surge forecasting, real-time coastal hazard assessment, and engineering design studies where high com-putational cost has historically limited throughput. At the same time, the present model focuses on wave properties and uniform wind forcing. Extending the surrogate to predict full action density spectra, to incorporate time-varying or spatially heterogeneous winds, and to generalize across diverse coastal morphologies represents an important direction for future research. Overall, this study provides a foundation for fast, data-driven surrogate modeling of coastal wave dynamics and demonstrates the viability of neural operator methods for replacing or augmenting computationally expensive components of traditional ocean forecasting systems. 

Data Statement 

The data generated using SWAN and trained DeepONet models will be made available via DesignSafe. The source code for this study will be made available at https://github.com/ShukaiC/NeuralOperator-CoastalWaves 

upon publication of the article. 

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to acknowledge the support from the US De-partment of Energy (DE-SC0022211), the U.S Army Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) through a Broad Agency Announcement (BAA W912HZ-23-2-0013) award, and the 2023 Laboratory-University Collabora-tion Initiative (LUCI) program, through an award made by the Office of the Under Secretary of War for Research and Engineering (OUSW(R&E)), Science and Technology (S&T) Foundations. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the computational resources provided by the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin, specifically the Frontera supercomputer under allocation DMS23001. 38 Supplementary Information Appendix A. Wave Action Balance Equation 

∂N (σ, θ ; x, y, t )

∂t + ∇x,y · ⃗c (x,y )N (σ, θ ; x, y, t ) + ∇σ,θ ·  ⃗c (σ,θ )N (σ, θ ; x, y, t )

= S(σ, θ ; x, y, t )

σ (A.1) Here, N (σ, θ, x, y, t ) represents the action density spectrum, which quan-tifies the wave energy per unit frequency and direction. It is defined as 

N = Eσ , where E denotes the energy density of the waves, and σ is the rel-ative frequency. On the left-hand side, the first term captures the rate of change of action density over time. The second term is the spatial propaga-tion term, which represents propagation of action in geographic space with propagation velocities cx and cy in x and y directions, and it is the vector sum of group velocity and the ambient current velocity. The third term is spectral propagation term, which represents depth-induced / current-induced refraction with propagation velocity cθ in terms of relative frequency σ and shifting of the relative frequency due to variations in depth and currents with propagation velocity cσ in terms of propagation direction θ.The source term on the right-hand side represents the combined effects of wind energy input, nonlinear wave-wave interactions, and various dissipation processes. SWAN incorporates these source terms using empirical formula-tions to represent the underlying physical mechanisms of wave dynamics. At each time step, the model updates the wave action density for all computa-tional grid points across the study domain. The third-generation wave model is suitable for well representing complex wave fields under varying wind and bathymetric conditions, although the computation cost is high. Further de-tails of the implemented source term can be found in the SWAN Scientific and Technical Documentation [39]. The gradient of radiation stresses (wave-induced force per unit surface area) and stresses are defined: 

Fx = −∂S xx 

∂x − ∂S xy 

∂y , (A.2) 39 Fy = −∂S yx 

∂x − ∂S yy 

∂y , (A.3) 

Sxx = ρg 

Z ∞

> 0

Z 2π

> 0



n − 12 + n cos 2 θ



E(σ, θ ) dθ dσ, (A.4) 

Syy = ρg 

Z ∞

> 0

Z 2π

> 0



n − 12 + n sin 2 θ



E(σ, θ ) dθ dσ, (A.5) 

Sxy = ρg 

Z ∞

> 0

Z 2π

> 0

n sin θ cos θ E (σ, θ ) dθ dσ, (A.6) 

Hsig = 4 

sZ Z 

E(σ, θ )dσdθ, (A.7) where S is the gradient of radiation stress, n is the group velocity parameter, 

θ is the wave propagation direction, σ is the frequency, E(σ, θ ) is the energy density spectrum, and Hsig is the significant wave height. 

Appendix B. Optuna Hyperparameter Optimization 

The model’s performance can be further improved by tuning hyperpa-rameters such as the number of network layers, neurons per layer, batch size, and other training parameters, since different hyperparameter selections af-fect model accuracy. To achieve this, Optuna, an open-source hyperparame-ter optimization framework is used for systematically search for the optimal set of hyperparameters [46]. User can explicitly specify the search space for each variable and Optuna enables automated tuning using an efficient search algorithm, such as Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) or Bayesian op-timization, which adaptively selects promising hyperparameter combinations based on previous trials. [47] The search space for each hyperparameter is shown in Table B.8. To improve prediction accuracy, DeepONet uses a 1D case to run Optuna and obtain a set of hyperparameters. The number of trials in Optuna is set to 100, and the number of epochs is set to 3,000. This means that Optuna explores 100 different combinations of hyperparameters, and each combinations is trained for 3,000 epochs to obtain a score that is compared 40 Table B.8: Hyperparameter search space used in Optuna. 

Hyperparameter Range 

> General

Initial Learning Rate 10 −5, 5 × 10 −5, 10 −6, 10 −3

Batch Size 64 , 128 , 256 , 512 

Branch/Trunk Output Shape 5, 10 , 15 , 20 , 25 , 30 , 35 , 40 

> Branch

Number of Layers 3, 4, 5, 6

Neurons Per Layer 16 , 32 , 48 , 64 , 80 , 96 , 112 , 128 

Activation Function LeakyReLU, elu, tanh, swish Regularizer none, l1, l2 Initializer glorot/he normal, glorot/he uniform Trunk  Number of Layers 3, 4, 5, 6

Neurons Per Layer 16 , 32 , 48 , 64 , 80 , 96 , 112 , 128 

Activation Function ReLU, elu, tanh, swish Regularizer none, l1, l2 Initializer glorot/he normal, glorot/he uniform with other combinations. The best-performing set of hyperparameters is then selected and used to train the DeepONet model, as shown in the Table 1. 

References 

[1] N. Booij, R. C. Ris, L. H. Holthuijsen, A third-generation wave model for coastal regions: 1. model description and validation, Journal of geo-physical research: Oceans 104 (C4) (1999) 7649–7666. [2] L. H. Holthuijsen, Waves in oceanic and coastal waters, Cambridge uni-versity press, 2010. [3] S. Causio, S. Shirinov, I. Federico, G. De Cillis, E. Clementi, L. Men-taschi, G. Coppini, Coupling ocean currents and waves for seamless cross-scale modeling during medicane ianos, Ocean Science 21 (3) (2025) 1105–1123. doi:10.5194/os-21-1105-2025. URL https://os.copernicus.org/articles/21/1105/2025/ 

[4] M. S. Longuet-Higgins, R. W. Stewart, Radiation stress and mass trans-port in gravity waves, with application to ‘surf beats’, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 13 (4) (1962) 481–504. doi:10.1017/S0022112062000877. 41 [5] J. Dietrich, M. Zijlema, J. Westerink, L. Holthuijsen, C. Dawson, R. Luettich Jr, R. Jensen, J. Smith, G. Stelling, G. Stone, Modeling hurricane waves and storm surge using integrally-coupled, scalable com-putations, Coastal Engineering 58 (1) (2011) 45–65. [6] S.-C. Hsiao, H. Chen, W.-B. Chen, C.-H. Chang, L.-Y. Lin, Quantify-ing the contribution of nonlinear interactions to storm tide simulations during a super typhoon event, Ocean Engineering 194 (2019) 106661. doi:10.1016/j.oceaneng.2019.106661. [7] O. M. Phillips, On the generation of waves by turbulent wind, Journal of fluid mechanics 2 (5) (1957) 417–445. [8] J. W. Miles, On the generation of surface waves by shear flows, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 3 (2) (1957) 185–204. [9] K. Hasselmann, On the spectral dissipation of ocean waves due to white capping, Boundary-Layer Meteorology 6 (1974) 107–127. [10] O. Shemdin, K. Hasselmann, S. Hsiao, K. Herterich, Nonlinear and lin-ear bottom interaction effects in shallow water, Turbulent fluxes through the sea surface, wave dynamics, and prediction (1978) 347–372. [11] J. A. Battjes, J. Janssen, Energy loss and set-up due to breaking of random waves, in: Coastal engineering 1978, 1978, pp. 569–587. [12] Y. Eldeberky, V. Polnikov, J. Battjes, A statistical approach for model-ing triad interactions in dispersive waves, in: Coastal Engineering 1996, 1996, pp. 1088–1101. [13] T. W. Group, The WAM model — a third generation ocean wave predic-tion model, Journal of physical oceanography 18 (12) (1988) 1775–1810. [14] P. A. Janssen, Progress in ocean wave forecasting, Jour-nal of Computational Physics 227 (7) (2008) 3572–3594. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2007.04.029. [15] A. Roland, F. Ardhuin, On the developments of spectral wave models: numerics and parameterizations for the coastal ocean, Ocean Dynamics 64 (6) (2014) 833–846. doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10236-014-0711-z. 42 [16] P. Janssen, The Interaction of Ocean Waves and Wind, Cambridge Uni-versity Press, 2004. URL https://books.google.com/books?id=Rb0fRcrTiBUC 

[17] N. Booij, R. C. Ris, L. H. Holthuijsen, A third-generation wave model for coastal regions: 1. model description and validation, Jour-nal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 104 (C4) (1999) 7649–7666. doi:https://doi.org/10.1029/98jc02622. [18] H. L. Tolman, A third-generation model for wind waves on slowly varying, unsteady, and inhomogeneous depths and currents, Journal of Physical Oceanography 21 (6) (1991) 782–797. doi:https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0485(1991)021<0782:ATGMFW>2.0.CO;2. [19] C. Jörges, C. Berkenbrink, H. Gottschalk, B. Stumpe, Spatial ocean wave height prediction with cnn mixed-data deep neural networks us-ing random field simulated bathymetry, Ocean Engineering 271 (2023) 113699. [20] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, G. Hinton, Deep learning, nature 521 (7553) (2015) 436–444. [21] G. Bai, Z. Wang, X. Zhu, Y. Feng, Development of a 2-D deep learning regional wave field forecast model based on convolutional neural network and the application in South China Sea, Applied Ocean Research 118 (2022) 103012. [22] H. Choi, M. Park, G. Son, J. Jeong, J. Park, K. Mo, P. Kang, Real-time significant wave height estimation from raw ocean images based on 2d and 3d deep neural networks, Ocean Engineering 201 (2020) 107129. [23] Z. Wei, A. Davison, A convolutional neural network based model to predict nearshore waves and hydrodynamics, Coastal Engineering 171 (2022) 104044. [24] X. Feng, G. Ma, S.-F. Su, C. Huang, M. K. Boswell, P. Xue, Amulti-layer perceptron approach for accelerated wave forecasting in Lake Michigan, Ocean Engineering 211 (2020) 107526. 43 [25] S. Fan, N. Xiao, S. Dong, A novel model to predict significant wave height based on long short-term memory network, Ocean Engineering 205 (2020) 107298. [26] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, DeepONet: Learn-ing nonlinear operators based on the universal approximation theo-rem of operators, Nature Machine Intelligence 3 (3) (2021) 218–229. doi:10.1038/s42256-021-00302-5. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s42256-021-00302-5 

[27] J. D. Osorio, Z. Wang, G. Karniadakis, S. Cai, C. Chryssosto-midis, M. Panwar, R. Hovsapian, Forecasting solar-thermal sys-tems performance under transient operation using a data-driven ma-chine learning approach based on the deep operator network ar-chitecture, Energy Conversion and Management 252 (2022) 115063. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enconman.2021.115063. [28] S. Mao, R. Dong, L. Lu, K. M. Yi, S. Wang, P. Perdikaris, Ppdonet: Deep operator networks for fast prediction of steady-state solutions in disk–planet systems, The Astrophysical Journal Letters 950 (2) (2023) L12. doi:https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/acd77f. [29] S. Kushwaha, J. Park, S. Koric, J. He, I. Jasiuk, D. Abuei-dda, Advanced deep operator networks to predict mul-tiphysics solution fields in materials processing and ad-ditive manufacturing, Additive manufacturing (2024) 104266–104266doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2024.104266. [30] W. Diab, M. Al Kobaisi, U-deeponet: U-net enhanced deep operator network for geologic carbon sequestration, Scientific Reports 14 (1) (Sep 2024). doi:https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-72393-0. [31] P. Rivera-Casillas, S. Dutta, S. Cai, M. Loveland, K. Nath, K. Shukla, C. Trahan, J. Lee, M. Farthing, C. Dawson, A neural operator emulator for coastal and riverine shallow water dynamics (2026). arXiv:2502.14782. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14782 

[32] J. Zhang, X. Zhao, D. Greaves, S. Jin, Modeling of a hinged-raft wave energy converter via deep operator learning and 44 wave tank experiments, Applied Energy 341 (2023) 121072. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2023.121072. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0306261923004361 

[33] Q. Cao, S. Goswami, T. Tripura, S. Chakraborty, G. E. Karniadakis, Deep neural operators can predict the real-time response of floating offshore structures under irregular waves, Computers & Structures 291 (2024) 107228. [34] Q. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Zhao, J. Ding, D. Xu, Multiple-input operator network prediction method for nonlinear wave energy converter, Ocean Engineering 317 (2025) 120106. [35] Y. Zheng, A. G. Borthwick, Z. Lin, Phase-resolved wave prediction from radar observations based on a multi-scale fourier neural operator, Physics of Fluids 37 (11) (2025). [36] H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, P. Li, J. Zhou, D. Xu, A deep operator network method for high-precision and robust real-time ocean wave prediction, Physics of Fluids 37 (3) (2025). [37] 1990 DELILAH nearshore experiment: Summary report, Technical re-port chl-97-24, US Army Corps of Engineers Waterways Experimenta-tion Station (1997). URL https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA330026 

[38] R. Ris, L. Holthuijsen, J. M. Smith, N. Booij, A. v. Dongeren, The ONR test bed for coastal and oceanic wave models, in: Coastal Engineering 2002: Solving Coastal Conundrums, World Scientific, 2003, pp. 380–391. [39] T. S. team, SWAN Technical Documentation, Delft University of Tech-nology, Faculty of Civil Engineering and Geosciences, Environmental Fluid Mechanics Section, Delft, The Netherlands, sWAN Cycle III ver-sion 40.51 (2006). URL http://www.fluidmechanics.tudelft.nl/swan/index.htm 

[40] R. A. Luettich, J. J. Westerink, N. W. Scheffner, ADCIRC : an advanced three-dimensional circulation model for shelves, coasts, and estuaries. Report 1, Theory and methodology of ADCIRC-2DD1 and 45 ADCIRC-3DL, Tech. rep., US Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station (Nov. 1992). URL https://erdc-library.erdc.dren.mil/items/ 81b728f7-629f-4ef8-e053-411ac80adeb3 

[41] D. R. Lynch, W. G. Gray, A wave equation model for finite element tidal computations, Computers & fluids 7 (3) (1979) 207–228. [42] C. Dawson, J. J. Westerink, J. C. Feyen, D. Pothina, Continuous, dis-continuous and coupled discontinuous–continuous galerkin finite element methods for the shallow water equations, International journal for nu-merical methods in fluids 52 (1) (2006) 63–88. [43] T. C. Massey, M. E. Anderson, J. M. Smith, J. Gomez, R. Jones, STWAVE: Steady-State Spectral Wave Model User’s Manual for STWAVE, Version 6.0, Tech. Rep. ERDC/CHL TR-11-1, US Army Corps of Engineers (Sep. 2011). URL https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA388197 

[44] K. Hasselmann, T. P. Barnett, E. Bouws, H. Carlson, D. E. Cartwright, K. Enke, J. Ewing, A. Gienapp, D. Hasselmann, P. Kruseman, et al., Measurements of wind-wave growth and swell decay during the joint north sea wave project (jonswap)., Ergaenzungsheft zur Deutschen Hy-drographischen Zeitschrift, Reihe A (1973). [45] T. Chen, H. Chen, Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by neural networks with arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical systems, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks 6 (4) (1995) 911–917. doi:10.1109/72.392253. [46] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, M. Koyama, Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework, in: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discov-ery & data mining, 2019, pp. 2623–2631. [47] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, M. Koyama, Optuna: A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework, in: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Dis-covery and Data Mining, 2019. 46