Title: Adaptive anisotropic composite quadratures for residual minimisation in neural PDE approximations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00308v1

Published Time: Mon, 04 May 2026 00:32:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION IN NEURAL PDE APPROXIMATIONS   

> SANTIAGO BADIA †AND KISHORE NORI †
> Abstract. We study the role of numerical quadrature in residual-minimisation methods for neural network approximation of partial differential equations. We first present an abstract error framework that separates approximation, quadrature and optimisation errors, and derive a nonlinear Strang-type estimate quantifying how inaccuracies in the discrete loss affect the final approximation. Motivated by this analysis, we propose an anisotropic adaptive composite quadrature strategy that controls the relative quadrature error of the residual loss using richer reference quadratures and bisection-based refinement. We then introduce a refresh-based training methodology that rebuilds the quadrature only when an online error indicator exceeds a prescribed threshold, balancing accuracy and computational cost. Numerical experiments on a range of benchmark problems show that the proposed approach narrows the gap between training and reference losses, uses quadrature points more efficiently and delivers strong approximation accuracy relative to non-adaptive quadrature strategies.

1. Introduction 

In this article, we study how numerical quadrature affects the quality of approximations of partial differential equations ( PDE s) obtained with fully connected, feed-forward neural networks, i.e., multi-layer perceptrons. We focus on strong-form residual minimisation methods, in which the neural network ( NN ) is trained by minimising a residual-based loss. In particular, we consider the deep least squares method [10, 13, 41], whose loss involves integrals of the strong residual over the physical domain. Early works approximated these integrals using uniform collocation points [28], while later Monte Carlo ( MC ) and Quasi-Monte Carlo ( QMC ) integration became standard in what came to be known as Physics Informed Neural Networks ( PINN s) [37]. Although such approaches have been successfully applied to a wide range of PDE s [44], the quality of the induced quadrature is often treated as a secondary concern. The central issue is that, if the quadrature is too coarse or poorly distributed, the optimiser may reduce the discrete loss while the underlying continuous residual loss remains poorly approximated. This mismatch between training and true losses can lead to severe overfitting with respect to the quadrature, even when the optimiser appears to converge. Because NN s are global, highly nonlinear approximators, constructing accurate quadratures is non-trivial [15]. Fine uniform or quasi-uniform composite quadrature rules that accurately integrate all relevant realisations of a NN architecture are computationally impractical for reasonably sized networks. This makes adaptive control of the quadrature a central component of the numerical method. Several adaptive ideas have been proposed for neural PDE solvers, including fixed-interval Monte Carlo refresh [49] and mesh-partition-based approaches [10, 31]; see also [43] for a variational viewpoint on residual-driven adaptivity. Focusing on adaptive quadratures, [38] proposed a 1D adaptive mesh-refinement algorithm based on local integration error. That approach already illustrates the potential of quadrature adaptation in 1D driven by local error, but it is limited to single-step refinement, does not explicitly enforce quadrature error control before training resumes, and does not include coarsening, which can be important for redistributing rather than hierarchically accumulating points [4]. An alternative line of work exploits the NN structure itself to achieve adaptivity [30, 33]. These approaches can yield accurate integration and interpretability, but extracting a domain-aware partition becomes computationally expensive for deep networks and complex architectures [48] and may not capture other coefficients and terms in the loss. The contributions of this work are threefold. First, we formulate a relative perturbation framework for residual-minimisation losses and derive a nonlinear Strang-type estimate that separates approximation, quadrature and optimisation errors. Second, motivated by this estimate, we propose an anisotropic 

h-adaptive composite quadrature strategy that explicitly controls an estimator of the residual-loss quadrature   

> †School of Mathematics, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia
> E-mail addresses :santiago.badia@monash.edu, sai.nori@monash.edu .
> 1
> arXiv:2605.00308v1 [math.NA] 1 May 2026 ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 2

error for the current network realisation. In particular, we advocate a bisection-based, anisotropic h-adaptive quadrature [16] that adapts to the current NN realisation and aims to control the quadrature error in the residual loss throughout training. Third, we introduce a refresh-based training procedure in which the quadrature is rebuilt only when an online training/reference loss indicator exceeds a prescribed threshold. In contrast to existing approaches, our focus is not only on improving quadrature accuracy locally, but on explicitly controlling the relative perturbation of the residual loss throughout training. This leads to a training-aware adaptive quadrature strategy, in which the quadrature is dynamically rebuilt based on a global error indicator tied to the optimisation process. The theoretical results justify the importance of controlling quadrature perturbations in residual-minimisation losses, while the numerical experiments show that the proposed adaptive strategy can substantially reduce training/reference loss mismatch and improve accuracy compared with standard fixed quadrature and sampling strategies. The outline of the paper is as follows. In Sect. 2, we establish an abstract framework for residual minimisation and discuss representative residual losses arising in neural PDE approximation. In Sect. 3, we formalise minimisation over a nonlinear manifold, identify the relative quadrature perturbation and optimisation errors and derive a nonlinear Strang-type estimate for the resulting approximation. We also provide a weaker result that can still apply when considering variational crimes that are commonplace in the PINN s literature. In Sect. 4, we present an adaptive quadrature framework leading to an anisotropic, bisection-based h-adaptive composite quadrature with non-nested primal and reference rules. In Sect. 5, we introduce a refresh-based training strategy that monitors an online quadrature error indicator and rebuilds the quadrature only when needed. Finally, in Sect. 6 we report numerical experiments on a range of PDE benchmark problems from scientific machine learning and adaptive mesh refinement ( AMR ), comparing the proposed approach with uniform, MC and QMC -based quadratures, including Latin hypercube sampling (LHC) and Halton sampling. 2. Abstract formulation 

In this section, we introduce the abstract residual minimisation framework used throughout the paper. The framework is based on minimising a residual norm of the problem at hand. We then illustrate this setting with representative examples arising in neural approximation of PDEs. 2.1. Residual minimisation framework. Let X and Y be Banach spaces and T : X → Y . We consider the following problem: given ℓ ∈ Y , find u ∈ X such that T u = ℓ. The problem can be restated as a minimisation problem: find 

u ∈ argmin 

> v∈X

J (v). (1) Here J (v) .

= ∥T v − ℓ∥pY , with p ≥ 1. Under the following assumptions, the problem is well-posed [21]. 

Assumption 2.1. The operator T is linear, bounded above, i.e., 

∥T u ∥Y ≤ CT ∥u∥X ∀u ∈ X, (2) for some constant CT > 0, bounded below, i.e., 

α∥u∥X ≤ ∥ T u ∥Y ∀u ∈ X, (3) for some constant α > 0, and its adjoint T ′ : Y ′ → X′ is injective. 

Lemma 2.1. Under Assumption 2.1, the solution u of (1) is unique and satisfies α∥u∥X ≤ ∥ ℓ∥Y .

Proof. Uniqueness holds if and only if T is bijective. By the Banach closed-range theorem and the open mapping theorem, T is bijective if and only if it is bounded below and its adjoint is injective, which hold by Assumption 2.1. The bound by the data follows from (3) and the identity T u = ℓ. □

Under Assumption 2.1, if Y is a Hilbert space, then the problem can be restated in a least-squares form: 

u ∈ X : ( T u, T v )Y = ( ℓ, T v )Y ∀v ∈ X. 

This problem is the first-order optimality condition for the minimisation of J 2/p , which is differentiable (and strictly convex). Since J 2/p and J share the same minimiser (the map t 7 → t2/p is strictly increasing for p > 0), the two problems are equivalent. We now illustrate the abstract setting with two representative PDE s. Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a bounded domain with Lipschitz boundary ∂Ω. We consider the Poisson problem and the linear transport problem on Ω.ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 3

Poisson problem . Consider the Poisson problem −∆u = fΩ in Ω with Dirichlet boundary conditions 

u = g on ∂Ω. This problem admits a unique solution for X = H1(Ω) and Y = H1(Ω) ′ × H1/2(∂Ω) . We set ℓ .

= ( fΩ, g ) and define the operator T u .

= ( −∆u, u |∂Ω). The loss functional is then given by: 

J (v)2/p = ∥T v − ℓ∥2 

> Y

= ∥ − ∆v − fΩ∥2 

> H1(Ω) ′

+ ∥v|∂Ω − g∥2

> H1/2(∂Ω)

. (4) Assuming elliptic regularity, the problem admits a unique solution in the smoother functional setting 

X = H2(Ω) and Y = L2(Ω) × H3/2(∂Ω) . In that case, the loss functional becomes: 

J (v)2/p =

Z

> Ω

(−∆v − fΩ)2dΩ + γ∥v|∂Ω − g∥2

> H3/2(∂Ω)

. (5) where γ > 0 is a numerical parameter. We note that the first loss functional involves dual norms, which are hard to compute numerically. This has motivated the use of the ill-posed settings discussed in Sect. 3.4. 

Linear transport problem . Consider a pure transport problem 

βββ · ∇ u = fΩ in Ω,

where βββ is a solenoidal vector field. We impose inflow boundary conditions on 

Γ− = {x ∈ ∂Ω : βββ · n(x) < 0},

where n is the outward unit normal to ∂Ω. We set 

X = L2 

> βββ

(Ω) .

= u ∈ L2(Ω) : βββ · ∇ u ∈ L2(Ω) 

and Y = L2(Ω) × L2

> |βββ·nnn|

(∂Ω) , where L2

> |βββ·nnn|

(Γ −) is the weighted L2 space on the inflow boundary with respect to |βββ · nnn|. The operator T is defined as (βββ · ∇ u, u |Γ− ) and f is defined as (fΩ, g ), where fΩ is the source term and g is the inflow boundary condition. As a result, the loss functional is given by: 

J (v)2/p =

Z

> Ω

(βββ · ∇ v − fΩ)2dΩ + γ

Z

> Γ−

(v|Γ− − g)2|βββ · n|dΓ−. (6) 3. Functional manifold minimisation 

In this section, we analyse the minimisation of a nonnegative loss functional over a manifold of functions. Since the exact computation of the functional may not be possible, we study the effect of the error introduced in its evaluation. Our focus is the relative perturbation setting relevant to the residual minimisation problems considered in this paper, together with the error introduced by the optimiser when approximating the minimiser. Let us consider a family of maps R# : P# → N # ⊂ X, where P# is a finite-dimensional Euclidean space and N# is a manifold embedded in X, parameterised by hyper-parameters # ∈ H . R# can be the NN realisation map that assigns to each parameter vector θθθ ∈ P# a function R#(θθθ) ∈ N # ⊂ X and 

H can include standard hyper-parameters that encode the NN architecture, such as the number of layers, the number of neurons per layer, the activation function, etc. The goal is to minimise a nonnegative loss functional J over the manifold N#. In practice, N# is neither convex nor closed in X and uniqueness does not hold in general; this is the case when N# is a NN . Instead, we define the argmin space M#(J )

of minimisers of J over cl( N#):

M#(J ) = argmin 

> u∈cl( N#)

J (u).

We have: 

J (v) ≤ inf 

> w∈N #

J (w), ∀v ∈ M #(J ). (7) In this section, we treat J as a general loss functional. Later, we will particularise the discussion to the case in which J is some power of a norm of the residual of the problem. In practice, the exact evaluation of J is often unavailable because the loss contains integrals or dual norms that must be approximated numerically. In the present work, the main source of error is the replacement of these integrals by numerical quadrature, which leads to a discrete functional ˜J . Our focus below is therefore the case in which the functional is approximated and the optimisation algorithm attains the minimum only up to a prescribed tolerance. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 4

3.1. Relative perturbation error. For semi-positive definite functionals, such as those arising in residual minimisation approaches, the first class of errors we consider is the inexact evaluation of the loss functional 

J . In our setting, these perturbations arise mainly from approximating the integrals in the loss by quadrature rules and, when relevant, from inexact evaluation of dual norms. They can be quantified by a relative error, 

|J (v) − ˜J (v)| ≤ εrel J (v), (A1) where εrel quantifies the relative error introduced by the approximated functional. In practice, enforcing (A1) uniformly over the entire manifold N# is not feasible. Instead, the adaptive quadrature strategy introduced later aims to control this perturbation condition locally at the network realisations encountered during training. 3.2. Optimisation error. Assuming that we replace the minimisation of the exact functional J by the minimisation of an approximated functional ˜J , the second error that we face in practice is the one related to the (non-convex) optimisation of the functional ˜J over the manifold N#. In general, we cannot guarantee that the optimisation algorithm converges to a global minimiser of ˜J over N#, due to the non-convex loss landscape exhibiting multiple local minima. Instead, we denote by ˜u# ∈ N # the output of the optimisation algorithm. Let M#( ˜J ) be the set of minimisers of ˜J over cl( N#). We assume that: 

min   

> v∈M #(˜J)

| ˜J (˜ u#) − ˜J (v)| ≤ εopt , (A2) where εopt quantifies the optimisation error, i.e., how close the output of the optimisation algorithm is to a global minimiser of ˜J over cl( N#).When the perturbation in ˜J relative to the exact loss functional J is measured as in Sect. 3.1, we can establish the following bound on the value of the functional at the output of the optimisation algorithm. 

Lemma 3.1. Let us assume that the minimisation problem (1) admits a unique solution u ∈ X. Let ˜u# be the output of the optimisation algorithm. If (A1) and (A2) hold, we have: 

J (˜ u#) ≤ 11 − εrel 



(1 + εrel ) inf 

> w∈N #

J (w) + εopt 



.

Proof. First, we readily check that (A1) implies: 

(1 − εrel )J (v) ≤ ˜J (v) ≤ (1 + εrel )J (v), ∀v ∈ N #. (8) Using the definition of the training error in (A2) and M#( ˜J ) and the upper bound in (8), we obtain: 

˜J (˜ u#) ≤ ˜J (v) + εopt ≤ (1 + εrel )J (v) + εopt , (9) for some v ∈ M #( ˜J ) that attains the minimum in (A2). Invoking (7) and the lower bound in (8) on the LHS, we prove the result. □

The estimate is meaningful only when εrel < 1, which corresponds to a regime in which the quadrature-induced perturbation does not dominate the loss functional. 3.3. Nonlinear Strang’s lemma. We now particularise the abstract result above to the residual minimisation setting. Here, nonlinear refers to approximation on a manifold N# rather than on a vector space. This yields a nonlinear Strang-type estimate that separates approximation, quadrature and optimisation errors. We then discuss a related interpretation for PINN-like methods based on variational crimes. The following nonlinear version of Strang’s Lemma applies to the quadrature approximation of the residual functional introduced above. We recall the notation: u is the exact solution of the problem (1) and 

˜u# is the output of the optimisation algorithm. 

Corollary 3.1. Let us assume that the continuity (2) and coercivity (3) of T hold under X, and the problem admits a unique solution u ∈ X. If the approximate loss functional ( ˜J ) obeys assumption (A1) and the output ˜u# of the optimisation algorithm satisfies (A2), then we have: 

∥˜u# − u∥X ≤ 1

α

 1(1 − εrel )



(1 + εrel ) inf  

> w∈cl( N#)

J (w) + εopt 

 1/p 

(10) ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 5

≤ 1

α

 1(1 − εrel )



(CT )p (1 + εrel ) inf  

> w∈cl( N#)

∥u − w∥pX + εopt 

 1/p 

. (11) 

Proof. The setting and assumptions are the same as in Lemma 3.1, so we start from the assertion of that lemma. Since J (v) = ∥T (v − u)∥pY because T u = ℓ, applying the coercivity estimate (3) on the left-hand side yields the first bound. Applying the continuity estimate (2) on the right-hand side then gives the final bound. □

The estimate shows that, in stable residual-minimisation settings, the relative quadrature error enters the bound through multiplicative factors that scale the best-approximation error, rather than as a purely additive perturbation. In particular, poor quadrature can significantly amplify approximation errors by distorting the loss functional and therefore the optimisation landscape on which the NN is trained. In addition, the optimisation error contributes additively. In particular, this motivates controlling the quadrature error in a relative sense, as in (A1) , so that the distortion of the loss functional remains proportional to its magnitude during training. 3.4. PINN-like methods. PINN -like methods often use the residual-minimisation framework together with variational crimes to avoid the explicit computation of dual norms in the loss functional. A common approach is to replace Y by a larger space Y endowed with a weaker norm ∥ · ∥ Y , and to view the operator as T : X → Y . In this relaxed setting, one cannot in general prove (2) and (3) with the weaker norm. Nevertheless, one can define the weaker (semi-)norm ∥ · ∥ 0,X .

= ∥T · ∥ Y , for which analogous bounds are immediate. If the data in (1) satisfy ℓ ∈ Y , then the solution u ∈ X of the original problem is also a minimiser of the relaxed functional ∥T v − ℓ∥pY over X, although uniqueness may fail. Based on the assumption (A1) and (A2), beginning with Lemma 3.1 and proceeding similarly to the proof of the nonlinear Strang’s lemma, in Corollary 3.1, we obtain the following corollary. 

Corollary 3.2. Let u be the solution of (1) for data ℓ ∈ Y . Assume that u is also the unique minimiser of the relaxed functional ∥T v − ℓ∥Y over X. Let ˜u# be the output of the optimisation algorithm. Then we have: 

∥T ˜u# − T u ∥pY ≤ 11 − εrel 



(1 + εrel ) inf  

> w∈X

∥T u − T w ∥pY + εopt 



.

Example 3.1 (Poisson problem) . Let us consider the statement of the Poisson problem introduced above. Consider the space Y = L2(Ω) × L2(∂Ω) . The relaxed functional (with p = 2 ) is given by: 

Z

> Ω

(∆ v + fΩ)2dΩ + γ

Z

> ∂Ω

(v − g)2ds, 

which is easy to compute using numerical integration. However, one cannot bound ∥u∥H2(Ω) by ∥∆u∥L2(Ω) +

∥u∥L2(∂Ω) . Despite the ill-posedness of the problem, this is the common setting in PINN formulations. 4. Adaptive quadratures 

In this section, we discuss an effective practical strategy for satisfying (A1) . More precisely, given the perturbation assumption (A1) introduced in Sect. 3.1, our goal is to formulate a local quadrature-estimator condition, denoted below by (A1 ′) , from which the relative perturbation bound (A1) for the quadrature-based approximation ˜J of the exact loss functional J follows for the current NN realisation during training. For standard numerical methods posed on vector spaces, e.g., finite element methods, one can often construct a fixed quadrature rule with sufficiently high polynomial accuracy. In those settings, the relevant integrands involve piecewise polynomials and known analytical functions such as forcing terms, boundary conditions and physical coefficients. For discretisation on nonlinear manifolds, such an approach is no longer feasible. Different neural network realisations can exhibit different localised features depending on the parameters. As a result, it is impractical to construct a fixed quadrature rule that satisfies (A1) uniformly over all relevant realisations of the NN , especially for deep architectures with many parameters. This creates a form of overfitting in which the optimisation may find a solution ˜u# that minimises the approximated functional ˜J while J (˜ u#)

remains large. Accordingly, we consider an adaptive quadrature rule that depends on the current realisation of the neural network. More precisely, we define ˜J by replacing the exact domain and boundary integrals in J with composite numerical quadrature. Hence, for each v ∈ N #, the quadrature used to evaluate ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 6

˜J (v) is adapted to that current realisation rather than chosen uniformly over the whole manifold N#,which would be prohibitively expensive or infeasible. The key idea is to pair a primal quadrature rule with a richer quadrature that serves as a reference and yields cell-wise error estimates. This reference quadrature plays a role analogous to a validation set in machine learning, while also guiding local improvements to the training quadrature itself. Unlike standard machine learning settings, we can, in principle, draw arbitrarily many quadrature points, limited only by computational cost. The local cell-wise estimates are then aggregated into a global indicator controlling the perturbation of each integral contribution to the loss. This local-to-global construction is what allows the adaptive procedure to target assumption (A1) in a computable way. As a model case, let us consider a term of J that can be written as an integral over a domain ω raised to some power. We denote this contribution by Jω(v) for v ∈ N # and write Iω(f ) .

= R 

> ω

f for a nonnegative integrand f (v) ∈ L1(ω), and Jω(v) = Iω(f )1/p for p ≥ 1.4.1. Adaptive composite quadratures. We consider the automatic generation of an anisotropic h-adaptive composite quadrature for the computation of I(f ). We start with a coarse partition T of ω, so that 

I(f ) = X

> K∈T

IK (f ), IK (f ) .

=

Z

> K

f (x).

Let bK be a fixed reference element and let FK : bK → K ⊂ Rd be a Cp+1 diffeomorphism onto the physical element K ∈ T , with JK (ˆ x) .

= det DF K (ˆ x). Let bQ be an operator that approximates the integral of a function on bK and is exact on Pp( bK), and define the quadrature approximation on K via the pullback of the integral to the reference element bK as follows: 

QK (f ) .

= bQ f ◦ FK JK

 ∀f ∈ L1(K). (12) This defines an approximation of the integral IK (f ). Classical error estimates generally assume standard shape-regularity assumptions (see, e.g., [14, Lemma 30.9]); however, weaker assumptions regarding shape regularity may suffice given the anisotropic interpolation error estimates (cf. [1]). The following result provides an estimate on anisotropic partitions. 

Lemma 4.1 (Anisotropic quadrature error for axis-aligned boxes) . Let bK = Qdi=1 [0 , 1] and K =

Qdi=1 [ai, a i + hi] be axis-aligned boxes in Rd, and let FK : bK → K be the affine map FK (ˆ x) = (a1 + h1 ˆx1, . . . , a d + hd ˆxd). Let QK be the tensor-product Gaussian quadrature of degree p in each direction, and f ∈ Hp+1 (K). Then there exists a constant C > 0, depending only on d and p, such that 

Z

> K

f (x) dx − QK (f ) ≤ C X

> |α|=p+1
> d

Y

> i=1

hαi+1  

> i

∥Dαf ∥L∞(K). (13) 

Proof. The proof follows by applying the standard tensor-product Gaussian quadrature error estimate in each direction, using the affine map FK and the multi-dimensional Taylor expansion. The error is a sum over multi-indices α with |α| = p + 1 , and each term involves the product of the mesh sizes hi raised to 

αi + 1 and the corresponding mixed derivative of f . □

We would like to compute the cell-wise quadrature error |IK (f ) − QK (f )|, which is not available in general. We therefore estimate it by considering a richer quadrature bQ′ that is exact on Pp′ ( bK) and the corresponding Q′ 

> K

obtained via pullback, usually referred to as the reference quadrature. The absolute integration error incurred by QK can then be estimated by δK := |Q′ 

> K

− QK | for all K ∈ T , with global estimator δ := P 

> K∈T

δK . We assume that this estimate is efficient and reliable, i.e., there exist constants 

ceff > 0 and Crel > 0 such that 

ceff δK ≤ | IK (f ) − QK (f )| ≤ Crel δK , ∀K ∈ T . (A1 ′)This assumption is standard in adaptive quadrature, where the integration error is estimated by comparing quadrature rules of different orders. Its reliability, however, typically relies on regularity properties of the integrand and is not guaranteed in full generality. In our setting, it should therefore be understood as an idealised condition that guides the design of the adaptive strategy. The remainder of the construction explains how (A1 ′), together with the adaptive stopping criterion, provides a mechanism to enforce the global perturbation estimate (A1). ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 7

Conceptually, we mark cells with the largest quadrature errors and refine the partition accordingly. The new quadrature rule is then defined by applying the same local quadrature rule on the refined partition Tref .Assigning T ← T ref and repeating this process yields increasingly accurate approximations of Iω(f ) as the cell diameters decrease. 

Lemma 4.2. Assume that the local estimator-control condition (A1 ′) holds and that the adaptive loop terminates at the current network realisation v# once 

δ1/p ≤ ξ ˜Jω(v#), (14) is satisfied for a prescribed relative tolerance ξ > 0. If ξ is small enough so that C1/p  

> rel

ξ < 1, then the perturbation bound (A1) holds for 

εrel (v#) .

= C1/p  

> rel

ξ

1 − C1/p  

> rel

ξ .

Proof. Summing (A1 ′) over K ∈ T , using the concavity of x 7 → x1/p and invoking (14), we obtain 

Jω(v#) − ˜Jω(v#) ≤ C1/p  

> rel

δ1/p . ≤ C1/p  

> rel

ξ ˜Jω(v#).

Hence ˜Jω(v#) ≤ Jω(v#) + Jω(v#) − ˜Jω(v#) ≤ Jω(v#) + C1/p  

> rel

ξ ˜Jω(v#),

so (1 − C1/p  

> rel

ξ) ˜Jω(v#) ≤ Jω(v#). Combining this with the previous estimate yields 

Jω(v#) − ˜Jω(v#) ≤ C1/p  

> rel

ξ

1 − C1/p  

> rel

ξ Jω(v#),

which is exactly (A1) for this contribution. □

In particular, for small ξ , the resulting relative perturbation is of order O(ξ).

Remark 4.1. In practice, one also needs an absolute tolerance ρ on δ to account for rounding errors and as a safety net for the case in which the integral is very small. Accordingly, the adaptive loop is stopped once either the relative criterion (14) or the absolute criterion is met, that is, 

δ1/p ≤ max( ρ, ξ ˜Jω(v#)) . (15) 

Remark 4.2. We are implicitly assuming here, and elsewhere in the discussion, that ˜Jω(v#) ≥ 0. Indeed, the exact contribution Jω(v#) is a norm of the corresponding residual and is therefore nonnegative. Likewise, if the primal quadrature rule has nonnegative weights, then ˜Jω(v#) ≥ 0 as well, and the assumption is satisfied. In our experiments, we have only considered positive-weight quadratures, which we have observed experimentally to be essential for the success of the neural solvers. 4.2. On the choice of the refined quadrature. A common and highly effective choice for adaptive quadrature is to use nested rules, in which the refined quadrature reuses the quadrature points of the primal rule. A standard example is provided by Gauss-Kronrod rules, where additional points are added to a Gauss rule to increase its degree. However, in the context of NN training, nested quadrature-based adaptive approaches have major disadvantages. First, because the low-order and high-order rules reuse points, they are less effective at detecting overfitting scenarios, which are common in NN training and are precisely one of the reasons for using adaptive quadrature in the first place. Second, making such quadratures efficient in terms of the total number of evaluation points per cell often leads to negative weights. In NN training, this can lead to severe instabilities, since the loss may become negative and unbounded from below, thereby encouraging the optimiser to overfit by driving the solution towards large negative blow-ups. To remedy these drawbacks while retaining the (anisotropic) bisection refinement strategy, we propose using polynomial quadratures with positive weights. Tensor-product Gauss-Legendre rules are of particular interest here; they are accurate for tensor-product polynomial spaces up to degree 2k − 1, where k is the number of points in each spatial variable (hereafter referred to as the quadrature order). We also explore (quasi-) optimal polynomial quadratures, such as the Witherden-Vincent [54] and Xiao-Gimbutas [55] families. These similarly feature positive weights, with only minor exceptions in the Xiao-Gimbutas family. Ensuring positive weights is also crucial from an analysis perspective, as it guarantees that the ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 8

quadrature-based approximations of norms and inner products remain well-defined, and thus the functional 

˜J .4.3. Anisotropic refinement rule. The fundamental idea of the h-adaptive composite quadrature approach is to begin with a coarse partition of the integration domain Tinit and to refine the cell with the largest error estimate among (δK )K∈T , repeating this process on the updated partition until the stopping criterion is met. Instead of using isotropic refinement of the marked cells, we consider anisotropic refinement in order to reduce the number of quadrature points generated after refinement and to mitigate the curse of dimensionality. 1 It is noteworthy that the bisection refinement strategy results in far fewer partitions to achieve the same relative tolerance and is hence computationally cheaper. However, this requires a strategy for selecting the bisection plane for a “marked” cell. We formalise this strategy as follows. Assume that bK is a d-cube, and let its coordinate axes be indexed by j ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , d }.To each axis we assign a positive value ζjK that measures the expected reduction in the quadrature error estimate on K when it is bisected along the central plane orthogonal to direction j. When K is marked for refinement, the quantities ζjK are computed for all j ∈ { 1, . . . , d }, and the axis corresponding to the largest value of ζjK is selected for bisection. Ideally, one would bisect the element K along each central axis and compute the resulting reduction in the quadrature error estimate for every candidate partition. These reductions define the ideal quantities bζjK ,which determine the optimal bisection axis. 

bζjK

.

= δK+

> j

+ δK−

> j

, ∀j ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , d } (16) where K+ 

> j

and K− 

> j

are child cells obtained by bisecting K along the plane corresponding to axis j. (In the algorithms, the child cells obtained from K are denoted by the set C(K).) However, computing the ideal directional error estimates, {bζjK }dj=1 , can become computationally prohibitive as the problem dimensionality 

d increases. To ensure computational efficiency, it is necessary to derive alternative, efficient surrogate indicators, {ζjK }dj=1 . These cheaper equivalents must serve the same purpose: providing a reliable heuristic for the reduction in quadrature error along each axis without requiring the full evaluation of candidate sub-quadratures. Alternatively, the role of bζjK can be reinterpreted in terms of the difficulty of estimating the integral along direction j, as measured by ζjK . Refinement along the corresponding central axis plane is then expected to provide the best reduction in the quadrature error estimate among all possible bisections. This can be formulated through the implication 

ζjK ≤ ζlK =⇒ bζjK ≤ bζlK , ∀j, l ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , d }. (17) This leads to the heuristic approach of Genz-Malik [16], based on the work of [45], in which ζjK is defined through fourth differences, that is, symmetric finite-difference approximations of the fourth derivative of the integrand. These quantities are intended to measure the irregularity of the integrand, and hence the difficulty of integration, in the corresponding direction. The fourth differences are constructed in a standard way, using 5 points arranged symmetrically around the centroid, including the centroid itself, along the coordinate axis j in the reference cell bK. If Q′ 

> K

involves quadrature points available symmetrically along the coordinate axes, we can reuse these points for computing {ζjK }dj=1 . This is the case for quadratures used in Genz-Malik and also tensor-product Gauss-Legendre quadratures. However, for Witherden-Vincent and Xiao-Gimbutas families we need to additionally construct these points, typically performed using 1D Gauss-Legendre quadrature points of order 5 or above, along each central coordinate axis. It is important to note that this procedure can also be extended to simplices, provided the anisotropic bisection is defined appropriately, as proposed in [17, 18]. Alternatively, in 2D one can handle simplices within the framework of Alg. 1, which is designed for quadrilaterals, by incorporating a Duffy transform into the reference-to-physical map FK . This allows the refinement process on the reference square to induce the corresponding partitions on the simplex in physical space.  

> 1We note that the partition is required only for integration, which is why it is straightforward to handle highly anisotropic partitions. As a result, this approach offers advantages over the adaptive finite element interpolation strategies in [4, 5], which usually involve mesh constraints such as 2:1 balance and shape regularity. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 9

4.4. Global adaptive quadrature algorithm. Alg. 1 outlines the global adaptive procedure for constructing the quadrature rule using the ingredients introduced above. In particular, ξ is the algorithmic relative tolerance appearing in the stopping rule (14) , while ρ is the corresponding absolute safeguard for very small integral contributions. It is noteworthy that the adaptive quadrature construction procedure is tied to a 

Algorithm 1: The (anisotropic) bisection-based h-adaptive quadrature 

Requirements: 

rule (degree (p), degree_ref (p′)), stopping_criterion (rtol (ξ, relative tolerance), atol 

(ρ, absolute tolerance), maxevals )

Input: f , Tinit 

Output: S, E, T

SET T ← T init 

COMPUTE the local quadrature approximations QK and Q′ 

> K

of IK (f ) using polynomial quadratures of degree and degree_ref over all cells in T

ESTIMATE the local quadrature error δK for each element K ∈ T by |QK − Q′ 

> K

|

SET S ← P 

> K∈T

QK and E ← P 

> K∈T

δK

while stopping_criterion (rtol , atol , maxevals ) is not met do 

MARK the element with highest error estimate K∗ := argmax K δK

BISECT K∗ into child elements, C(K∗), along the plane of anisotropy determined by the corresponding dominant fourth difference axis: ˆnnnK∗ := FK∗ ◦ (argmax j {ζjK∗ }), resulting in the refined partition T ← (T \ { K∗}) ∪ C (K∗)

COMPUTE QK , Q′ 

> K

, and δK for each K ∈ C (K∗)

UPDATE the current integral estimate S ← S − QK∗ + P 

> K∈C (K∗)

QK and current global error estimate E ← E − δK∗ + P 

> K∈C (K∗)

δK

end return S, E, T

specific state of the loss functional and hence to a specific NN instance. Since we start from a coarse mesh and refine cells one by one, there is no need for explicit coarsening within a single adaptive quadrature build. As we will see in the training methodology, rebuilding the quadrature from a base mesh at each refresh makes coarsening and redistribution an emergent feature of the overall procedure. This is precisely the connection with Sect. 5: the refresh strategy there repeatedly reconstructs the adaptive quadrature so that the quadrature control targeted in the present section is maintained as the network evolves during training. The error estimate in Lemma 4.1 implies convergence of the adaptive algorithm under uniform refinement and also under the anisotropic refinement rule, provided the directional error indicator reliably selects the most effective refinement direction. While the extension of the adaptive quadrature ( AQ ) strategy to simplicial meshes (triangles and tetrahedra) is a direct generalisation based on the refinement rules discussed in Sect. 4.3, it is omitted here for brevity and reserved for future investigation. 5. Methodology and Implementation 

To balance computational efficiency and avoid overfitting, we propose an automatic training strategy that monitors the relative global quadrature error and triggers a refresh only when the estimated error exceeds a prescribed threshold. The estimate is computed using the primal (training) and reference quadratures extracted at the previous AQ trigger. In addition to the target relative tolerance ξ for the adaptive quadrature itself, we introduce an AQ refresh threshold ( τ ≥ ξ). The tolerance ξ controls the level of relative perturbation targeted when a new quadrature is constructed, whereas τ controls when the existing quadrature is considered no longer reliable and must be refreshed. Let η denote the relative quadrature error indicator obtained by comparing the primal and reference discrete losses, i.e., a computable approximation of the relative perturbation of the loss functional at the current network realisation. We rebuild the quadrature only when the relative global integration error estimate η exceeds τ during training. This strategy aims to maintain control of the relative perturbation of the loss functional during training, by triggering quadrature reconstruction only when the current quadrature no longer provides sufficient control for the evolving network state. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 10 

Alg. 2 summarises the resulting training strategy. A refresh is performed whenever the error indicator 

η exceeds the user-specified threshold τ . At each refresh, the anisotropic bisection-based h-adaptive algorithm is run from a user-provided base partition until the target relative tolerance ξ is reached. The resulting composite quadrature then defines the discrete loss used for training and for estimating the relative global quadrature error. Alg. 2 is fully deterministic and uses full-batch training. The adaptive quadrature 

Algorithm 2: DLS training with adaptive quadrature (Alg. 1) 

Requirements: 

AQ_algorithm (rtol ( ξ), atol ( ρ)) , refresh_tol (τ ), 

stopping_criterion (max_epochs , time_limit , unsatisfactory_progress )

Input: uθθθ0 , J (ideal loss representative), ˜J (primal discrete loss, based on Qp), ˜J ′ (reference discrete loss, based on Qp′

), Tinit 

Output: uθθθL+1 , Thistory 

SET η0 

> T

← τ // force initial adaptive step 

for i = 0 , 1, 2, . . . , max_epochs do if ηi 

> T

≥ τ then 

ADAPT T ← AQ_algorithm (uθθθi , J , Tinit , ξ, ρ)UPDATE the perturbed primal loss ˜J ← (T , Q p) and perturbed reference loss 

˜J ′ ← (T , Q p′

)

COLLECT Thistory ← (i, θ θθi, T )

end 

TRAIN using ˜J as the loss function, updating the NN parameters from θθθi to θθθi+1 

ESTIMATE the error indicator ηi+1  

> T

by applying ˜J and ˜J ′ to the updated approximation uθθθi+1 

if stopping_criterion (max_epochs , time_limit , unsatisfactory_progress ) is met 

then break end end 

SET I ← i;

return uθθθI+1 , Thistory 

algorithm (Algorithm 1) is executed on the CPU, where the primal and reference quadrature points and weights are accumulated in physical space. These data are then transferred to the target device, which is a GPU in our implementation. Training and quadrature-error estimation are subsequently performed on the GPU for the current partition. At the end of each epoch, the indicator η is recomputed; whenever 

η ≥ τ , the adaptive quadrature is rebuilt on the CPU. For efficiency, an AQ refresh is never triggered during line-search iterations. Between refresh steps, the quadrature is kept fixed while the network evolves, so the error indicator reflects the degradation of the quadrature accuracy over the training trajectory. Although single-GPU [40] and multi-GPU [42] extensions for adaptive quadrature exist, we do not use them in this work. Numerical experiments indicate that adaptive quadrature is only a minor contributor to the total compute time, since the number of AQ executions is a small fraction of the total number of training epochs. Moreover, for ambient dimensions d ≤ 4, the speed-up offered by a GPU for adaptive quadrature construction is not significant compared with a CPU. A key feature of our approach is that automatic differentiation is not required to propagate through the adaptive quadrature algorithm itself. Instead, the algorithm is used only to construct the quadrature points and weights, which are then used to approximate the loss functional for training and quadrature error estimation. Because NN training is performed exclusively with the primal quadrature, we also reduce computational cost by avoiding the calculation of parametric derivatives of the loss evaluated on the richer reference quadrature. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 11 

6. Numerical Experiments 

In this section, we assess the proposed anisotropic h-adaptive composite quadrature on a collection of benchmark problems that spans steady, time-dependent and parametric linear and nonlinear PDE s with sharp layers, localised structures and non-trivial boundary conditions. Our aim is to determine whether explicit control of a reliable estimate of the global integration error reduces overfitting and improves approximation quality relative to standard non-adaptive quadrature strategies, especially in regimes where classical discretisations often require specialised adaptivity or problem-specific enhancements. 6.1. Experimental setup. We now summarise the comparison protocol and the implementation choices shared across the experiments. Throughout this section, we refer to the richer quadrature and the corresponding higher-fidelity loss evaluation as the reference quadrature and reference loss, respectively. Close agreement between training and reference losses is therefore essential for a reliable method, whereas a persistent mismatch indicates that the training quadrature is no longer reliable. 

Neural network approximation ansatz. All experiments use fully connected, feed-forward NN s with tanh 

activation and a linear output layer. We describe each network by its input and output dimensions, the number of hidden layers, and the common width of those hidden layers. Tanh NN s are globally C∞

smooth and have favourable approximation properties [12], which makes them natural candidates for strong-form residual minimisation. Their smoothness also permits direct evaluation of the residual without differentiability issues, in contrast to non-smooth activations that can be problematic for loss functionals involving nested parametric and ambient derivatives [33]. For each problem, the network architecture and initialisation are kept fixed across the different quadrature strategies in order to isolate the effect of the integration method. Specifically, parameters are initialised using the Glorot uniform strategy [20] with a fixed seed. When comparing with existing benchmarks, we use the same architecture or a smaller one when restricted by available hardware. 

Loss function. Throughout the numerical experiments, we use relaxed residual losses based on L2 norms, following the Poisson example in Example 3.1. More precisely, for a residual operator RΩ in the domain (or space-time domain) and boundary or initial residual operators RΓ, the loss has the generic form 

J (v) = 

sZ 

> Ω

RΩ(v) 2 dΩ + X

> Γ

γΓ

Z

> Γ

RΓ(v) 2 dΓ.

Here the sum runs over all relevant boundary and initial-condition contributions, so several terms may appear simultaneously. In particular, this allows mixed boundary conditions, such as combined Dirichlet and Neumann terms, each with its own penalty weight. This reduces to the L2 norm of the strong residual in the domain together with L2 penalty terms for the boundary conditions. The same idea is used for the initial and inflow conditions that appear in the time-dependent and transport examples. 2

Optimiser. We use the SSBroyden optimiser [3] throughout, together with the Hager-Zhang inexact line-search algorithm based on a weak Wolfe condition [22]. This choice is motivated by recent empirical and theoretical work indicating that quasi-Newton methods can substantially outperform first-order methods and L-BFGS for high-accuracy training in residual-based neural PDE solvers [26, 44, 47]. Moreover, as noted in [26, 47], second-order methods often balance the different terms in the loss more effectively, thereby reducing the need for explicit loss reweighting [50, 51]. Our numerical pipeline uses 64-bit floating-point arithmetic to avoid the loss of accuracy that can degrade second-order optimisation [26]. When the adaptive quadrature is refreshed, the optimiser resumes from its previous state and preserves the accumulated inverse Hessian approximation. 

Numerical quadrature. In most numerical experiments, we employ tensor-product Gauss quadratures with odd-even order pairings. A typical choice is order 7 for training and order 10 for the reference quadrature. This pairing is used to avoid shared odd-even artefacts across the two quadratures and to reduce numerical cancellations along the central axes. In three spatial dimensions, where tensor-product rules become increasingly expensive, we instead use the quasi-optimal polynomial quadrature families in [54, 55]. 

Comparison with non-adaptive quadrature strategies. To assess the effect of quadrature adaptation, we compare the proposed AQ algorithm (Alg. 1) with several standard non-adaptive quadrature strategies:       

> 2Observe that we are using p= 1 in the definition of Jfor all the numerical experiments. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 12

composite Gauss-Legendre quadrature on a uniform partition (uniform quadrature), MC quadrature, LHC (as used in [37]) and Halton sampling. The latter is a deterministic low-discrepancy strategy known to perform well in moderate dimensions [36], which covers the ambient dimensions considered here. To ensure a fair comparison, we match the computational budget of the non-adaptive baselines to the adaptive runs. The total number of quadrature points for MC , LHC and Halton sampling is fixed from the start to the 90% quantile of the adaptive history of total quadrature points. In practice, this is usually close to the maximum attained during training. For uniform quadrature, the number of partitions is fixed analogously as the nearest square number exceeding the 90% quantile of the adaptive partition counts. The corresponding richer quadratures are constructed in the same way, with sizes prescribed by the 90% quantile of the adaptive history of richer quadrature points. 

Visualisation. For visualisation of the computed solutions and approximation errors, we use fine point sets chosen independently of the final training quadrature in order to avoid misleading presentations of the generalisation behaviour. 

Computational time. The reported compute times include the cost of evaluating the true approximation errors ( L2 and H1), whenever available, on a fixed fine mesh at every training iteration. In one and two spatial dimensions, we also evaluate the loss on this mesh in order to verify the richer quadrature, although this is not required in practice. The timings should therefore be interpreted comparatively rather than as absolute benchmarks. All experiments were run on an NVIDIA V100 GPU. 

Computational framework. Our framework is implemented in Julia [9]. NN s are built with Flux.jl [24] and operated via Optimisers.jl, with automatic differentiation handled by Zygote.jl [23] and ChainRules.jl. The SSBroyden optimiser is implemented within the Optim.jl framework [35]. The anisotropic bisection-based 

h-adaptive quadrature builds on HCubature.jl [25] and Gridap.jl [6, 46] and is executed primarily on the CPU, whereas NN training is performed on the GPU using CUDA.jl [8]. All visualisations were produced with CairoMakie.jl [11]. This implementation split matches the methodology described in Sect. 5, where quadrature construction and training are separated computationally. 6.2. The neural network approximation of the 2D arc-tan well function. We begin with the simplest possible problem: function approximation using a neural network. Specifically, we consider a scalar-valued function in 2D defined on Ω = [0 , 1] 2 as follows: 

f (x, y ) = atan 



200 

p (x − 0.35) 2 + ( y − 0.45) 2 − 0.2

 

. (18) The ideal continuous loss function for function approximation is simply the L2 misfit error in this case. For this experiment, we employ a tanh neural network with width 25 and depth 4, containing a total of 2,051 

parameters (weights and biases across all layers). The AQ algorithm uses tensor-product Gauss-Legendre quadrature pairs of orders (7 , 10) , with a base uniform mesh partition of 3 × 3 for the adaptive quadrature to build upon, targeting a relative tolerance of 10 −2. Note that the base mesh provides quadrature point distribution independent of the solution structure. The tolerance threshold for triggering adaptive quadrature refinement is set to 5 × 10 −2, which is 5 times the target relative tolerance. Furthermore, the NN s are trained for a maximum of 10 ,000 epochs, regardless of the quadrature strategy. We construct a fixed fine mesh of size 100 × 100 , equipped with Gauss-Legendre quadrature of the same order as the training (primal) quadrature employed by the AQ algorithm, to estimate the L2 and H1 errors throughout training. Examining the NN approximation and final adaptive quadrature mesh in Fig. 1a, we observe that the AQ mesh successfully traces the circular arc where the target function (18) exhibits steep gradients, achieving highly localized refinement through the anisotropic nature of the AQ algorithm. Notably, the AQ mesh also captures the center of the well associated with the target function. Fig. 1b shows that the point-wise errors remain small across the domain. The training curve, and more importantly the reference curve, are informative indicators of the NN performance. In Fig. 2a, the training curve overlaps the reference curve. Moreover, the systematic downward trend in the cumulative cell-wise absolute integration error, driven by the marked AQ refreshes, supports the reliability of the training process and shows no indication of overfitting. Fig. 2b provides a detailed history of the error indicator throughout training, with immediate drops following AQ refreshes triggered when the indicator exceeds the prescribed threshold. In this experiment, adaptive quadrature refinement occurs only 11 times over the 10 ,000 training epochs, with refreshes becoming less frequent as training ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 13 

(a) NN approximation and the final adap-tive mesh. 

(b) Absolute point-wise error. 

Figure 1. Adaptive quadrature solution, final adaptive partition and absolute point-wise errors for the function approximation problem (18) using the AQ algorithm. epochs 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 10 −15 10 −10 10 −510 0 loss ref. loss integration error AQ refresh epochs 

(a) Training and reference loss histories to-gether with the cell-wise cumulative integra-tion error of the primal quadrature relative to the reference quadrature. epochs 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 10 −3.0 10 −2.5 10 −2.0 10 −1.5   

> error indicator AQ refresh epochs AQ refresh threshold (5.0×10 −2
> )

(b) Error-indicator history, which triggers AQ refreshes when it exceeds the prescribed threshold. 

Figure 2. Adaptive training diagnostics for the function approximation in (18). progresses. Similar AQ training-diagnostic figures arise throughout the remaining experiments, so we do not repeat them systematically. Instead, we show them again only for the most challenging Navier-Stokes benchmarks. We now present a comprehensive comparison of loss curves and approximation errors across all quadrature strategies in Figs. 3a and 3b: adaptive quadrature, uniform quadrature, MC , QMC (LHC ), and QMC (Halton). We start by observing that the proposed AQ strategy achieves superior L2 and H1 errors, followed closely by QMC (Halton). From Fig. 3a, we observe that only the adaptive quadrature strategy maintains a monotonic decrease in both training and reference losses. For the other quadrature approaches, the training loss continues to decrease while the reference loss stagnates, indicating a loss of generalisation. Importantly, the reference loss correlates strongly with the L2 and H1 errors, making it a useful practical indicator of training progress and reliability. It is also notable that we obtain good H1 errors even though the loss functional is based only on the L2 error. Despite employing the most quadrature points, the uniform quadrature strategy yields the poorest errors by a significant margin, exposing the inherent disadvantages of ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 14 computational time (sec) 0 50 100 150 200 training loss 10 −810 −710 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0                 

> computational time (sec) 050 100 150 200 reference loss (validation) 10 −710 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(a) Training and reference loss histories across all quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 50 100 150 200                        

> L 2 error 10 −710 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0
> computational time (sec) 050 100 150 200
> H 1 error 10 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(b) L2 and H1 error histories across all quadrature strategies. epochs 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 10 −12.5 10 −10.0 10 −7.5 10 −5.0 10 −2.5 loss error finer loss error AQ refresh epochs (c) Reference quadrature verification. 

Figure 3. Loss, error and verification histories for the function approximation in (18). uniform partitioning and revealing Runge phenomena. This is evident in the escalating H1 error progression for most part of the training, as seen in Fig. 3b. Finally, since the approximation quality of the reference quadrature is essential for accurately estimating cell-wise errors in the primal quadrature, we validate its effectiveness by comparing with a finer quadrature. We reuse the uniform composite quadrature constructed for L2 and H1 error estimation to perform an independent, accurate loss computation (interpreted as a test quadrature). As illustrated in Fig. 3c, we compare the error incurred by the primal composite quadrature with that of the reference quadrature (using the same partition) and the finer uniform composite quadrature. The results demonstrate that the reference quadrature estimates the error reliably and tracks the same trends throughout training, with only minor discrepancies after the final adaptive quadrature refinement. 6.3. The 1D Advection-Diffusion problem. From this section onwards, we focus on PDE benchmarks solved by L2 residual minimisation with NN s. In this section, we use the relaxed loss functional described in Example 3.1; for simplicity, we refer to this setting as the deep least squares approach. In this section, we consider a 1D advection-diffusion problem with homogeneous boundary conditions characterized by high Péclet numbers. We consider two values of the diffusion coefficient, ϵ = (0 .005 , 0.001) , with an advection coefficient β = 1 and source term f (x) = 1 on the domain (−1, 1) :

−ϵ∆u + βββ · ∇ u = f in Ω , (19) 

u = 0 on ∂Ω . (20) Notably, the problem has a closed-form solution, 

u(x) = 2 

 1 − e(x−1) /ϵ  1 − e−2/ϵ  + x − 1. (21) This Dirichlet boundary value problem is of particular interest due to the presence of a strong boundary layer at the right boundary that sharpens as ϵ → 0, making it difficult to resolve without adaptivity. Note that the ϵ = 0 .005 case was considered in [39], although in the context of a weak-form-based variational PINN approach. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 15 

exact approx error x              

> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> u
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> x
> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 error
> −4.0×10 ⁻⁹
> −2.0×10 ⁻⁹
> 02.0×10 ⁻⁹
> 4.0×10 ⁻⁹
> exact approx error ( u−uapprox )

(a) Exact and AQ solutions with final AQ parti-tion. x              

> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> u
> 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> x
> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 error
> −4.0×10 ⁻⁹
> −2.0×10 ⁻⁹
> 02.0×10 ⁻⁹
> 4.0×10 ⁻⁹
> exact approx error ( u−uapprox )

(b) AQ point-wise error. x             

> .5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> x
> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 error
> −0.2
> −0.1 0.0 exact approx error ( u−uapprox )

(c) Uniform quadrature point-wise error. x               

> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> u
> −4
> −3
> −2
> −1012
> x
> −1.0 −0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 error 024exact approx error ( u−uapprox )

(d) MC point-wise error. 

Figure 4. Comparison of adaptive, uniform and MC quadrature for the 1D advection-diffusion problem (19) with ϵ = 0 .005 .We begin with the ϵ = 0 .005 case, with Figs. 4a and 4b showcasing an accurate approximation of the solution with a very low and uniform error distribution, achieved with the adaptive quadrature strategy. Fig. 4a also shows the final quadrature partition distribution, displaying higher mesh density at the right boundary, where the boundary layer is located. The data efficiency of this approach is remarkable, requiring a maximum of only 20 partitions, amounting to just 140 primal (training) quadrature points in total. Only 6

AQ refreshes were required within the first 10% of the full 5,000 training epochs, with continued quadrature error control throughout the entire training. In contrast, the uniform composite quadrature, starting directly with the full 20 partitions, fails to capture the boundary layer accurately, as evident from Fig. 4c. Furthermore, MC quadrature with the full 140 points results in localized overfitting (see Fig. 4d), failing to even roughly capture the solution. The adaptive quadrature strategy remains strikingly accurate even for the difficult case of ϵ = 0 .001 ,maintaining very small L2 and H1 approximation errors over training; see Fig. 5b. The final adaptive quadrature mesh is even more concentrated at the right boundary than in the ϵ = 0 .005 case shown in Fig. 4. The final refresh also slightly reduces the number of mesh partitions while concentrating them predominantly near the right boundary. We re-emphasize the data-efficient nature of the adaptive quadrature strategy by noting that a maximum of 25 partitions (with the 90% quantile being 23 partitions) amounts to just 161 primal (training) quadrature points in total. We further highlight that only 7 AQ refreshes were required within the first 25% of the full 5,000 training epochs, maintaining continued quadrature error control for the entire training thereafter. In contrast, the uniform quadrature strategy leads to complete failure, as seen in Figs. 5a and 5b, by seemingly overfitting to the right Dirichlet boundary condition while complying with the convection part of ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 16 computational time (sec) 0 50 100 150 training loss 10 −710 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0               

> computational time (sec) 050 100 150 reference loss (validation) 10 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 110 2
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo AQ refresh

(a) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 50 100 150                

> L 2 error 10 −810 −610 −410 −210 0
> computational time (sec) 050 100 150
> H 1 error 10 −510 −310 −110 1
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo AQ refresh

(b) L2 and H1 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 5. Loss and error histories for the 1D advection-diffusion problem (19) with 

ϵ = 0 .001 

the PDE (19) and ignoring the left Dirichlet boundary condition. MC quadrature exhibits similar behaviour to the ϵ = 0 .005 case; the corresponding plots are omitted for brevity because they look very similar to those for the ϵ = 0 .005 case. The loss histories in Fig. 5a highlight the robustness of the adaptive quadrature strategy by showcasing a monotonic decrease in the reference loss that is strongly correlated with the training loss, thereby controlling overfitting that severely affects both uniform quadrature and Monte Carlo quadrature strategies. Consequently, the L2 and H1 approximation errors in Fig. 5b exhibit clear superiority for the adaptive strategy compared to the meaningless results obtained by the uniform and Monte Carlo strategies. We conclude by stressing that the same hyperparameter choices, in particular the NN architecture, relative tolerance and refresh threshold, were used for both ϵ = 0 .005 and ϵ = 0 .001 .6.4. The (1+1)D Viscous Burgers equation. Next, we consider the viscous Burgers’ equation benchmark problem used in [37, 44] with viscosity 0.01 /π , which exhibits shock formation. Although an exact solution can be approximately constructed [37], we consider the discrete approximate solution taken from [44], for fair comparison with the state-of-the-art results reported therein. We emphasize that we use a NN of width 20 and depth 3 (with 941 parameters), matching [44]. Notably, this is smaller than the NN size ranges used in [26], where the smallest one has 20 neurons and 4 layers. We also use the same number of training epochs as in [44], taken to be 15 ,000 .We begin the discussion with Fig. 6, which demonstrates the high accuracy of the solution obtained via the adaptive quadrature strategy. Point-wise errors remain consistently low, even in the vicinity of the shock. The final quadrature mesh successfully adapts to the shock’s progression, increasing partition density in ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 17  

> (a) NN approximation with final AQ partition (b) Absolute point-wise error

Figure 6. Adaptive quadrature solution, final adaptive partition and absolute point-wise errors for the viscous Burgers’ problem using the AQ algorithm. the high-gradient region while exhibiting clear anisotropy as the shock sharpens over time. Conversely, the mesh remains sparse in regions away from the shock, particularly as time t increases, which suggests near-optimal behaviour. The point-wise errors in Fig. 6 remain small across the domain, with no severe high-frequency oscillations around the shock. Their maximum magnitude is about half that reported in [44], and the final relative L2

error is 1.44 × 10 −6. This remains a substantial improvement, especially because we enforce the boundary conditions through a penalty term rather than the strong enforcement used in [26, 44]. Furthermore, our approach demonstrates a clear advantage in data efficiency: the maximum number of training quadrature points used throughout the simulation was 8,134 (equivalent to 166 partitions across the full space-time domain, achieved with only 18 AQ refreshes). By contrast, the setup in [44] uses 10 ,000 MC points, which were resampled every 500 epochs. A comparison of the considered quadrature strategies is presented in Fig. 7a. For the same total computational expenditure, near the final stage where other approaches stagnate, our adaptive quadrature strategy achieves a relative L2 error that is an order of magnitude lower—and continuing to improve—than the next best method, QMC (Halton) quadrature. The training and reference losses remain well aligned in Fig. 7b, indicating good generalisation throughout training. The contrast between the training and reference loss histories also clearly illustrates the effect of overfitting . Notably, the strong correlation between the reference loss and the relative L2 error throughout the training process underscores the practical importance of the reference loss; it serves not only to identify quadrature insufficiency but also as a reliable metric for assessing overall convergence. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that uniform quadrature exhibits the poorest performance, suffering from overfitting and stagnating in accuracy very early in the training process. This behaviour is consistent with the 2D function-approximation benchmark in Sect. 6.2, which also features a sharp target profile. As in that case, QMC (Halton) remains the most effective non-adaptive strategy. In summary, the proposed adaptive quadrature strategy demonstrates a clear superiority over traditional static and quasi-random approaches, achieving an order of magnitude higher precision while maintaining significantly greater data efficiency. 6.5. The (1+1)D Korteweg-De Vries (KdV) equation. Next, we consider the Korteweg-De Vries (KdV) equation 

α ∂u ∂t + βu ∂u ∂x + γ ∂3u∂x 3 = 0 , (22) with the domain and boundary conditions specified in [44]. This problem exhibits nonlinear dispersive behaviour through a convection term similar to that of the Burgers equation, combined with a third-order term that introduces dispersion. Because it lacks a viscous second-order term, the problem provides a demanding test for numerical solvers. The system yields a complex solution characterised by the interaction of two solitons, making it a demanding approximation problem. An analytical solution is also available, as ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 18 computational time (sec) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 rel.  L2 error 10 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0     

> adaptive uniform MC QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(a) Relative L2 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 training loss 10 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0                    

> computational time (sec) 050 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 reference loss (validation) 10 −410 −310 −210 −110 0
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(b) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 7. Loss and error histories for the viscous Burgers’ problem. 

(a) NN approximation with final AQ partition (b) Absolute point-wise errors 

Figure 8. Adaptive quadrature solution, final adaptive partition and absolute point-wise errors for the (1+1)D Korteweg-De Vries (KdV) problem (22) using the AQ algorithm. constructed in [44], which makes the benchmark especially useful. Using the same NN architecture (3 ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 19 computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 rel.  L2 error 10 −810 −610 −410 −210 0                 

> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 rel.  H 1 error 10 −810 −610 −410 −210 0
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(a) L2 and H1 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 training loss 10 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1                 

> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 reference loss (validation) 10 −610 −410 −210 010 2
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(b) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 9. Loss and error histories for the (1+1)D Korteweg-De Vries (KdV) problem. layers with 30 neurons) as in [44] and training for only 20 ,000 SSBroyden optimiser epochs—omitting the Adam pre-training used in [44]—we obtain an excellent approximation of the target solution. As shown in Fig. 8a, the interaction of the waves is captured particularly well, with the final adaptive quadrature mesh closely tracking the solution profile. Supporting this, the maximum point-wise errors (Fig. 8b) are approximately two orders of magnitude lower than those reported in [44, Fig. 15]. The final AQ partition is also consistent with refinement first concentrating on the stronger soliton and then resolving the weaker interaction region. Furthermore, the maximum number of partitions reached is 452 , totalling 

11 ,300 primal quadrature points, and this required only six AQ refreshes from an initial 5 × 5 mesh. The final relative L2 and H1 errors are 1.54 × 10 −8 and 1.85 × 10 −8, respectively, with a total runtime of 1,203 

seconds. By comparison, [44, Table 5] reported a relative L2 error of approximately 6 × 10 −6 using 15 ,000 

MC points resampled every 500 epochs, with even larger errors cited in the references therein. These results again highlight the superior performance and quadrature efficiency of the adaptive strategy. A comparison of the histories in Figs. 9a and 9b shows that the adaptive strategy spends substantial wall-clock time during the first 1,000 epochs. This is driven by larger line-search counts per epoch, likely caused by the difficult early loss landscape induced by the penalty treatment of the boundary conditions. The AQ refreshes then help the optimiser leave this stagnant phase, after which the errors and reference loss improve rapidly and monotonically. Moreover, only the AQ strategy exhibits training and reference losses that match in Fig. 9b. Uniform quadrature exits this initial stage earlier and attains lower early-time errors in Fig. 9a, but this advantage is short-lived. Without adaptation, the generalisation gap widens and the final errors remain above those of AQ. In contrast, the Monte Carlo ( MC ) strategy undergoes a similarly slow initial phase, then improves nonlinearly, first overfitting and only later recovering some generalisation. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 20  

> (a) NN approximation with final AQ partition (b) Absolute point-wise errors

Figure 10. Adaptive quadrature solution, final adaptive partition and absolute point-wise errors for the Cahn-Hilliard problem (23) using the AQ algorithm. Its progress remains markedly non-monotonic and it ends with the largest final errors among the tested methods, suggesting convergence to a suboptimal local minimum. The behaviour of both QMC variants is more extremely still: they remain in a slow-convergence regime for much longer before their late error reduction near the 3,600 -second runtime limit, as shown in Figs. 9a and 9b. Overall, the adaptive quadrature strategy achieves a superior approximation compared to the next best result, which was attained by uniform quadrature. In particular, the disparity in the relative H1 errors is significant, suggesting that the adaptive approach provides superior generalisation to the exact solution. The marked improvement in H1 accuracy, which accounts for derivatives of the solution, underscores the ability of adaptive quadrature to capture the underlying physics of the soliton interactions more faithfully than static sampling methods. 6.6. The (1+1)D Cahn-Hilliard problem. Next, we consider the fourth-order Cahn-Hilliard equation, which models phase separation in a binary fluid mixture. The solution exhibits multiple sharp phase transitions and is generally more challenging computationally than second-order phase-field models, primarily because of the fourth-order spatial derivatives. We adopt a benchmark problem from [53], where the scalar field u represents the relative concentrations of the binary components. The problem is defined by the following governing equations, supplemented with initial and periodic boundary conditions: 

ut − (γ2(u3 − u) − γ1uxx )xx = 0 , x ∈ [−1, 1] , t ∈ [0 , 1] , (23) 

u(0 , x ) = − cos(2 πx ), (24) 

u(t, −1) = u(t, 1) , (25) 

ux(t, −1) = ux(t, 1) , (26) where the parameters γ2 = 0 .01 and γ1 = 10 −6.For this problem, we employ a 4-layer NN with 50 neurons per hidden layer, a significantly narrower architecture than the 128-neuron-per-layer model used in [53]. Moreover, while the approach in [53] uses curriculum learning together with the L-BFGS optimiser, we adopt a full-batch space-time formulation solved with SSBroyden. The point-wise errors presented in Fig. 10b demonstrate the reliability of the approximation achieved by the adaptive quadrature (AQ) strategy. As shown in Fig. 10a, the model captures the sharp phase separation with high fidelity. Notably, the final AQ partition—obtained through 15 adaptation cycles starting from a 5 × 5 uniform grid—exhibits particularly high-aspect-ratio (thin) cells. This anisotropy underscores the algorithm’s focus on spatial refinement at sharp phase transitions, while largely bypassing temporal adaptivity due to the relatively stable dynamics along the time axis. A unified comparison of the various quadrature strategies, shown through the relative error histories in Fig. 11a and the loss histories in Fig. 11b, demonstrates that the adaptive quadrature (AQ) strategy, supported by frequent refreshes, successfully bypasses the stagnation phases encountered by the other methods. Consequently, it achieves superior relative L2 accuracy significantly earlier in training. With the ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 21 computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 rel.  L2 error 10 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0     

> adaptive uniform MC QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(a) L2 and H1 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 training loss 10 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1                  

> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 reference loss (validation) 10 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(b) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 11. Loss and error histories for the Cahn-Hilliard problem (23). exception of uniform quadrature, the other strategies show relatively close alignment between training and reference losses. This does not, however, translate into equally accurate solutions. The adaptive run reaches a maximum of 695 partitions, equivalent to 34 ,055 primal quadrature points, and still achieves substantially lower errors than the alternatives, whereas uniform quadrature eventually succumbs to irreversible overfitting. Here too, the reference loss history is consistent with the training loss but not so strongly correlated with the relative L2 error history. This discrepancy is likely attributable to the penalty-based enforcement of periodic boundary conditions. 6.7. The 2D arc wavefront problem with sharp gradients. We consider a Poisson problem with with forcing term and Dirichlet boundary conditions such that the solution of the problem is the manufactured solution 

u(x, y ) = atan 



100 

p (x + 0 .05) 2 + ( y + 0 .05) 2 − 0.7

 

, (27) which displays sharp gradients along an arc wavefront. The problem is defined on the unit square domain 

Ω = [0 , 1] 2. This problem is drawn from the NIST-AMR benchmark collection [34], which is designed to evaluate adaptive mesh refinement ( AMR ) strategies. It has also been used in recent work on adaptive finite element interpolated NN s [4]. For this problem, we employ a quadrature order combination of (7 , 10) ,using a base mesh that covers the entire domain without initial partitioning. The AQ algorithm is configured with tolerances of rtol = 10 −3 and refresh_tol = 10 −2. The trial network architecture comprises 4 hidden layers, each with a width of 50 neurons and the tanh activation function. The model is trained for 

15 ,000 epochs with a fixed Dirichlet penalty γD = 10 .0.We begin with Fig. 12b, which shows remarkably low point-wise errors that remain nearly uniform across the domain. Errors increase slightly near the boundaries, reflecting the intrinsic difficulty of capturing ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 22  

> (a) NN approximation with final AQ partition (b) Absolute point-wise errors

Figure 12. Adaptive quadrature solution, final adaptive partition and absolute point-wise errors for the 2D arc wavefront Poisson problem using the AQ algorithm. boundary data. The figure also highlights the ability of the h-adaptive process to resolve the high-gradient region efficiently, capturing the anisotropy of the sharp arc and concentrating effort where the solution is less regular. The adaptive run requires only 11 refreshes, all within the first 5,100 epochs. After that, the quadrature stabilises and no further refinement is needed to maintain the prescribed tolerances. Finally, a comparison across the various quadrature strategies in Fig. 13a shows that the AQ strategy significantly outperforms uniform, MC , and QMC (Halton) quadratures. These alternative schemes exhibit clear overfitting, while their trajectories suggest a highly non-convex or difficult loss landscape, a point reinforced by the loss histories in Fig. 13b and their longer run times. In contrast, the QMC (LHC ) approach remains competitive, yielding error levels only slightly above the AQ case within a similar temporal budget. 6.8. The 2D L-shaped Poisson problem with corner singularity. We next consider a Poisson problem with Dirichlet boundary conditions on the 2D non-convex L-shaped domain Ω = [ −1, 1] 2\[−1, 0] 2, together with the manufactured solution 

u(x) = r 23 sin(2 θ/ 3 + π/ 3) (28) which determines the boundary data and the source term. Although u belongs only to H3/2−ϵ(Ω) , the source term vanishes in Ω, so the primal deep least squares formulation remains well posed. For this experiment, we adopt a configuration close to that of the previous problem (Sect. 6.7). The main difference is the network architecture, which now has 5 hidden layers while maintaining a width of 50 neurons. The AQ hyperparameters remain unchanged, but the initial base mesh is partitioned into 3 blocks aligned with the L-shaped geometry. Training is run for 10 ,000 iterations. Fig. 14 shows that the AQ approximation is highly accurate overall. The point-wise errors are concentrated near the corner singularity, while the remaining boundary regions are captured with high fidelity. The training history records 17 mesh adaptation steps. These refreshes become less frequent as training progresses, while the quadrature error exhibits the expected drops at each AQ refinement point. The autonomous nature of these AQ refreshes is particularly noteworthy given the inherent difficulty of this problem, which typically challenges traditional numerical methodologies due to the corner singularity and non-convexity. The resulting refinement pattern concentrates quadrature elements around the re-entrant corner, both in the domain interior and along the singular boundary segments, so that the sharp gradients are resolved where they matter most. More importantly, the AQ strategy offers a clear advantage in approximation accuracy while requiring at least 20% less training time, highlighting its quadrature efficiency. It maintains stable generalisation throughout optimisation, with both L2 and H1 errors decreasing monotonically. In contrast, the alternative approaches stall early. This overfitting is clearly visible in Fig. 15b. Only the AQ strategy exhibits training and reference losses with the same qualitative trend, up to a scaling ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 23 computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 

> L 2 error

10 −610 −410 −210 010 2

computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 

> H 1 error

10 −410 −210 010 210 410 6

adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh 

(a) L2 and H1 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 training loss 10 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 110 210 3

computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 4500 reference loss (validation) 10 −510 010 510 10 10 15 

adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh 

(b) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 13. Loss and error histories for the 2D arc wavefront diffusion problem. 

(a) NN approximation with final AQ partition (b) Absolute point-wise errors 

Figure 14. Adaptive quadrature solution, final adaptive partition and absolute point-wise errors for the the L-shaped Poisson problem using the AQ algorithm. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 24 computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500                     

> L 2 error 10 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0
> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500
> H 1 error 10 −2.5 10 −2.0 10 −1.5 10 −1.0 10 −0.5 10 0.0
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(a) L2 and H1 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 training loss 10 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1             

> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 reference loss (validation) 10 −310 −210 −110 010 1
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(b) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 15. Loss and error histories for the L-shaped Poisson problem. factor. For the alternative approaches, the reference loss plateaus despite the continued reduction of the training loss. 6.9. Approximation on a non-trivial domain. We now consider a convection–diffusion–reaction problem on a non-convex double-rhombi domain, as described in [33]. The problem is defined as follows: 

−∇ ∇∇ · (κ∇∇∇u) + ( βββ · ∇ ∇∇)u = f in Ω ⊂ R2, (29) 

u = g on ∂Ω. (30) where the variable diffusion coefficient is given by κ(x, y ) = 2 + sin( xy ) and the constant convection velocity is βββ = [1 , 2] ⊤. The domain Ω is partitioned using an unstructured mesh (see Fig. 16a). The source term f and Dirichlet boundary data g are determined via the method of manufactured solutions, using: 

u(x, y ) = tanh  25  x2 + y2 − 0.25  ,

This solution profile exhibits sharp gradients concentrated along a circular arc, which specifically intersects the top and bottom interior corners of the double-rhombi domain, presenting a significant resolution challenge for non-adaptive schemes. For this problem, we employ a trial network architecture consisting of 4 hidden layers with 30 neurons each, utilizing the tanh activation function. The AQ algorithm is configured with a quadrature order combination of (7 , 10) , with tolerances set to rtol = 5 × 10 −3 and refresh_tol = 5 × 10 −2. The network is trained for 5,000 iterations, maintaining a constant Dirichlet penalty parameter of γD = 10 .0

throughout the optimisation process. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 25  

> (a) NN approximation with final AQ partition (b) Absolute point-wise errors

Figure 16. Adaptive-quadrature solution and final mesh for the convection–diffusion– reaction problem (29) on the non-trivial domain using the AQ algorithm. We begin with the resolution of the circular gradient transition achieved through the adaptive mesh updates. As shown in Fig. 16, the final mesh remains relatively coarse yet tracks the circular feature effectively. The AQ process is also efficient, reaching a maximum partition size of 90 in only 7 adaptation steps, all within the first half of the run. The point-wise error plot underscores the framework’s effectiveness: the error remains remarkably uniform across the domain. The boundaries require only minimal refinement beyond the initial domain edges, indicating that the h-adaptive quadrature localizes effort on the high-gradient interior feature rather than over-refining the Dirichlet boundaries. Furthermore, the AQ strategy achieves a markedly better approximation than the competing methodologies. As shown in Fig. 17a, it attains an L2 error more than two orders of magnitude lower, and an H1 error four orders of magnitude lower, than any alternative. The error histories are strongly correlated with the reference loss trajectories, indicating stable training and robust generalisation (see Fig. 17b). Moreover, only the AQ strategy exhibits training and reference losses with the same qualitative trend, up to a scaling factor. In contrast, the other approaches exhibit clear overfitting or stagnation, most visibly when their training histories continue to decrease while the reference loss does not. Notably, the QMC (Halton) method performs worst, which is consistent with its behaviour in earlier experiments involving sharp gradients or discontinuities. 6.10. 2D Navier-Stokes lid-driven cavity benchmark. We next consider the original 2D incompressible Navier-Stokes lid-driven cavity benchmark problem with a Reynolds number 3200 on Ω = [0 , 1] 2. We enforce no-slip boundary conditions for the velocity. On the top boundary, we enforce a velocity profile given by uuu(xxx) = ( uT , 0) with uT (x) chosen to be 

uT (x) = 1 − cosh ( C0 (x − 0.5)) cosh (0 .5C0) (31) with C0 = 50 . This problem setting has been extracted from [48], chosen to avoid discontinuities in the horizontal velocity at the top two corners of the cavity. We adopt the stream function-pressure approach and directly solve the problem at Re = 3200 (unlike the curriculum learning approach [27] adopted in [48]), aimed at testing the robustness of our approach in tackling the possible instabilities and convergence to erroneous solutions reported in [49, 52]. The high Reynolds number of Re = 3200 presents a formidable challenge, as the flow field is characterized by a hierarchy of vortices across multiple scales, coupled with complex singular behaviour at the upper corners of the cavity. To address this, we employ a two-output NN architecture featuring 6 hidden layers and a width of 50 neurons per layer, using the tanh activation function. The AQ algorithm is initialized from a uniform 5 × 5 base partition, with tolerances configured to rtol = 10 −5 and refresh_tol = 5 × 10 −3.Notably, the model is trained for a total of 25 ,000 epochs. This represents a substantial reduction in ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 26 computational time (sec) 0 50 100 150                   

> L 2 error 10 −610 −410 −210 010 2
> computational time (sec) 050 100 150
> H 1 error 10 −610 −410 −210 010 210 4
> adaptive monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(a) L2 and H1 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 50 100 150 training loss 10 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 110 210 3            

> computational time (sec) 050 100 150 reference loss (validation) 10 −2.5 10 0.0 10 2.5 10 5.0 10 7.5
> adaptive monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(b) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 17. Loss and error histories for the convection–diffusion–reaction problem (29) on the non-trivial domain. computational budget compared to the 100 ,000 iterations required by the the state-of-the-art PirateNets [48]. This choice reflects our empirical observation that, for this problem, training yields only marginal incremental benefits beyond a certain iteration threshold. Throughout the optimisation, the Dirichlet penalty parameter 

γD is held constant at 10 .We begin by noting that the AQ approximation remains highly reliable, as evidenced by the sustained control of the quadrature error shown in Fig. 18 and the close match between the training and reference losses throughout the run. The process requires only 10 AQ refreshes, most of which occur during the initial training phase. As the optimisation progresses, the frequency of these adaptations decreases, ultimately resulting in a maximum of 480 interior partitions and 83 boundary partitions. Given the strong performance and robust convergence of the AQ strategy on this benchmark, we omit further comparisons with less reliable alternatives here. Examining the quality of the approximation achieved in Fig. 19, we observe that the approach captures the global flow characteristics well. Panel (a) shows that the AQ strategy prioritizes resolution at the singular top corners while maintaining a coarser discretisation in the central domain. Panel (b) provides further evidence of solution quality by resolving vortices of various sizes and locations across the cavity. More importantly, panels (c) and (d) compare the transverse horizontal and vertical velocity profiles along the central axes against the standard reference data for transverse velocities taken from [19]. These profiles demonstrate a close agreement between the approximation obtained via the AQ strategy and the reference results. The approximation quality is further supported quantitatively by the achieved relative L2 error of 

3.71 × 10 −2, representing around a 12% improvement over the state-of-the-art result of 4.21 × 10 −2ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 27 epochs 0 5.00×10³ 1.00×10 ⁴ 1.50×10 ⁴ 2.00×10 ⁴ 2.50×10 ⁴      

> 10 −12.5 10 −10.0 10 −7.5 10 −5.0 10 −2.5 10 0.0
> loss ref. loss integration error AQ refresh epochs

(a) Loss curves with adaptive quadrature epochs 0 5.00×10³ 1.00×10 ⁴ 1.50×10 ⁴ 2.00×10 ⁴ 2.50×10 ⁴        

> 10 −610 −510 −410 −310 −2
> error indicator AQ refresh epochs AQ refresh threshold (5.0×10 −3
> )

(b) Error indicator & AQ refresh history 

Figure 18. Adaptive-quadrature training diagnostics for the 2D Navier-Stokes lid-driven cavity benchmark problem. 

(a) NN approximation with final AQ partition (b) Streamlines of the NN approximation y          

> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> u @  (x = 0.5)
> −0.3 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 approx ref. (Ghia et. al (1982))

(c) Transverse horizontal velocity comparison x           

> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
> v @  (y = 0.5)
> −0.50
> −0.25 0.00 0.25 approx ref. (Ghia et. al (1982))

(d) Transverse vertical velocity comparison 

Figure 19. Fluid-velocity results for the 2D Navier-Stokes lid-driven cavity and transverse velocity comparison against the benchmark data of [19]. ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 28 computational time (sec) 0 1.00×10 ⁴ 2.00×10 ⁴ 3.00×10 ⁴ 4.00×10 ⁴                        

> training loss 10 −710 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0
> computational time (sec) 01.00×10 ⁴2.00×10 ⁴3.00×10 ⁴4.00×10 ⁴
> reference loss (validation) 10 −710 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0
> adaptive monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

Figure 20. Training and reference loss history comparison for the 2D Stokes (Moffatt) problem across all considered quadrature strategies. reported by PirateNets [48]. Notably, the PirateNets results were obtained using a significantly deeper residual-based architecture and a training budget of 100 ,000 epochs, whereas our approach utilizes a more compact network and 25 ,000 iterations. This comparison highlights the superior efficiency and accuracy offered by the proposed AQ algorithm and training strategy, which effectively extracts higher accuracy from smaller networks and standard architectures. 6.11. 2D Stokes lid-driven wedge benchmark. To assess the proposed adaptive quadrature strategy on a challenging fluid problem, we solve the Stokes equations for viscous flow in a lid-driven wedge as described in [26]. This problem exhibits the multiscale hierarchy of Moffatt vortices induced by the geometry. To make the vortices and mesh partitions easier to inspect, all illustrations in this section stretch the x-axis by a factor of 2, yielding an aspect ratio of 1. Although this benchmark is linear, it remains a significant challenge because the vortex hierarchy weakens rapidly near the bottom corners; see [26, Section 2.6] for a detailed discussion. We therefore employ a larger network architecture with width 64 and depth 5. The AQ algorithm is configured with tolerances of rtol = 10 −5 and refresh_tol = 5 × 10 −3, and the model is trained for 200 .000 epochs. Throughout the optimisation, the Dirichlet penalty parameter γD is held constant at 10 .For this problem, the comparison between the training and reference loss histories in Fig. 20 is crucial. The training losses are initially similar across all approaches, so they are not by themselves informative about solution quality. However, the reference loss histories differ substantially. While the AQ strategy maintains stable generalisation, the alternative approaches show early overfitting, with the reference loss diverging and then stagnating. The data efficiency of the AQ approach is also noteworthy. Starting from a base mesh of 20 partitions, it requires only 6 adaptation steps, all within the first quarter of training. The algorithm reaches a maximum of 159 interior partitions and 40 boundary partitions, with refinement concentrated near the top two corners in both the interior and boundary discretisation. Finally, we compare solution fidelity using only the strongest non-adaptive baseline, namely QMC (LHC). Both methods appear to outperform the results reported in [26, Figure 23(d)], despite that study using a deeper architecture (8 hidden layers) and a much larger training budget of around 450 ,000 epochs. That approach also relied on 120 ,000 residual points and attention-based sampling [2], whereas our AQ strategy uses only 7,791 quadrature points. Moreover, while the reference study employs hard boundary constraints, we use a penalty formulation to better reflect practical domains and general boundary conditions, where hard enforcement is often infeasible. For a more complete assessment of solution quality, we examine the streamlines in Fig. 21. These show that the AQ strategy captures the vortex hierarchy near the bottom vertex more completely than the best ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 29  

> (a) Adaptive quadrature (b) QMC (LHC)

Figure 21. Streamlines for 2D Stokes (Moffatt) when trained with adaptive quadrature and QMC (LHC). alternative, where the smaller vortices are only partially resolved. Away from the bottom corner, the two solutions are already broadly similar, so the main visible difference is the more complete recovery of the fine vortex structure by AQ. The adaptive flow structures are better formed than the best solution reported in [26, Figure 23(a)]. This again highlights the ability of the AQ framework to resolve fine-scale multiscale features with a fraction of the computational resources and a simpler network architecture. 6.12. Parametric 2D Nonlinear Convection-Diffusion-Reaction problem. Before turning to a fully 3D problem, we consider a 2D parametric benchmark from [7]. The goal is to illustrate the advantage of adaptive quadrature in a parametric setting without resorting to specialised architectures for nonlinear operator learning [29, 32]. The problem reads: find u such that 

−∇ · (μ∇u) + βββ · ∇ u + σ e−pu 2

= f in Ω , (32) 

u = g on ∂Ω , (33) where p ranges over a prescribed parameter set Ωp ⊂ R on which we seek a reliable approximation of the PDE. The coefficients μ, βββ and σ are independent of p.For this benchmark, we take Ω = (0 , 1) 2, μ = 1 , βββ = [2 , 3] T and σ = 4 , and choose f = f (·, p ) and 

g = g(·, p ) so that the manufactured solution is 

u(x, y ; p) = cos  5  px + y

> 2

 

1 + p +



x + y

2

2

. (34) We enlarge the parametric domain from the original range Ωp = [0 .5, 2] in [7] to Ωp = [0 .5, 10] in order to test robustness over a substantially wider parameter interval. This turns the problem into an effectively 3D one in (p, x, y ) space, with computational domain Ω × Ωp. Dirichlet boundary conditions are imposed only on the physical boundary ∂Ω × Ωp .We use the tensor-product Gauss-Legendre order pair (4 , 5) for the adaptive quadrature. We start from a uniform mesh with 5 partitions in each direction and set rtol = 5 × 10 −3 and refresh_tol = 5 × 10 −2.The NN has 7 hidden layers of width 40 with tanh activation. Training is run for at most 10 ,000 epochs, with the Dirichlet penalty parameter fixed at γD = 10 .The resulting adaptive run requires only three quadrature refreshes. It reaches a maximum of 874 interior partitions, amounting to 55 ,936 quadrature points, together with 127 boundary partitions, corresponding to 

2,032 points on the Dirichlet boundary. The final relative L2 and H1 errors over the full spatial-parametric domain are 1.11 × 10 −5 and 1.86 × 10 −4, respectively. The comparison in Fig. 22a shows a clear advantage for the AQ strategy. Since the reported errors are measured over the entire spatial-parametric domain, they directly reflect generalisation across the full parameter range. In contrast, the non-adaptive alternatives diverge completely: their error histories stagnate very early, while the training-reference loss comparison ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 30 computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500                          

> L 2 error 10 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1
> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
> H 1 error 10 −410 −210 010 210 410 6
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(a) L2 and H1 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 training loss 10 −310 −210 −110 010 110 2                   

> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 reference loss (validation) 10 −2.5 10 0.0 10 2.5 10 5.0 10 7.5 10 10.0 10 12.5
> adaptive uniform monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(b) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 22. Loss and error histories for the nonlinear convection–diffusion–reaction problem in (32). in Fig. 22b shows growing discrepancy between training and reference losses. This shows that adaptive quadrature is essential for obtaining robust approximations in parametric nonlinear problems of this type. 6.13. The (2+1)D Parabolic Poisson equation. We now consider a challenging (2+1)D parabolic heat equation from the NIST- AMR benchmark collection [34], involving a moving circular wave front. This benchmark is relevant because it probes whether adaptive algorithms can control the number of degrees of freedom (DOFs) required in a finite element setting. The problem is posed with homogeneous initial condition and Dirichlet boundary conditions. The domain is Ω = ( x0, x 1) × (y0, y 1) and the source term is chosen such that the solution of the problem is the manufactured solution given by 

u(x, y, t ) = 1

C (x − x0)( x − x1)( y − y0)( y − y1) tan −1(t)

 π

2 − tan −1 (α(r − t)) 



, (35) with r =

q

(x − xc)2 + ( y − yc)2. Specifically, we take (xc, y c) = (0 , 0) , α = 100 , C = 10000 , and 

(x0, x 1) × (y0, y 1) × (0 , T ) = (0 , 10) × (−5, 5) × (0 , 10) .This benchmark is effectively a 3D space-time problem for the NN approximation. We therefore use the Witherden-Vincent optimised quadrature rule [54] with degree pair (9 , 11) , which is more data-efficient than standard tensor-product rules. The AQ base mesh is a uniform grid with three partitions in each direction. To keep the total number of quadrature points within the memory limits of the V100 GPU, we use the larger tolerances rtol = 5 × 10 −2 and refresh_tol = 10 −1. The NN has 7 hidden layers of ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 31 computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000                           

> L 2 error 10 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1
> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
> H 1 error 10 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1
> adaptive monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(a) L2 and H1 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 training loss 10 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1                  

> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 reference loss (validation) 10 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1
> adaptive monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(b) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 23. Loss and error histories for the (2+1)D Parabolic Poisson problem. width 25 with tanh activation. Training is run for at most 15 ,000 epochs, with the initial condition enforced through a penalty term analogous to the boundary data and the Dirichlet penalty parameter fixed at 10. Fig. 23 shows that, for AQ , the reference loss decreases steadily without stagnation (Fig. 23b), and the L2 and H1 error histories improve overall in a compatible manner (Fig. 23a), indicating sustained generalisation. The non-adaptive alternatives exhibit oscillations, stagnation or slow generalisation. The AQ strategy also enjoys a clear time advantage, reaching the maximum number of epochs in 3,136 seconds, compared with the next best runtime of 4,362 seconds, for a gain of more than 28% . Its final L2 and H1

errors are 3.96 × 10 −6 and 1.53 × 10 −5, respectively. These are roughly three and five times smaller than the next best approximation, obtained with QMC (Halton), which yields 9.35 × 10 −6 and 8.48 × 10 −5.For the quadrature comparison in this experiment, we omit uniform quadrature because, as seen in earlier experiments, it cannot resolve sharp solution profiles adequately. The same limitation also applies to the subsequent 3D convection-diffusion problem with a boundary layer. 6.14. The 3D convection-diffusion problem with boundary layer. We finally consider a purely 3D stationary convection-diffusion problem. It features a steep boundary layer and therefore presents a significant challenge for both traditional numerical methods and NN approximations. As discussed earlier in Sect. 6.3, the 1D analogue already showed a clear benefit from adaptive quadrature. Similar to the previous experiment, this benchmark is drawn from the NIST- AMR collection [34] and is defined as follows: 

−ϵ∆u + βββ · ∇ u = f in Ω ⊂ R3 (36) 

u = g on ∂Ω . (37) ADAPTIVE ANISOTROPIC COMPOSITE QUADRATURES FOR RESIDUAL MINIMISATION 32 computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000                        

> L 2 error 10 −710 −610 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 0
> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 2000
> H 1 error 10 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1
> adaptive monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(a) L2 and H1 error history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. computational time (sec) 0 500 1000 1500 2000 training loss 10 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1               

> computational time (sec) 0500 1000 1500 2000 reference loss (validation) 10 −510 −410 −310 −210 −110 010 1
> adaptive monte-carlo QMC (LHC) QMC (Halton) AQ refresh

(b) Training and reference loss history comparison across all considered quadrature strategies. 

Figure 24. Loss and error histories for the 3D convection-diffusion problem. We take ϵ = 10 −2 and βββ = (2 , 1, 1) . The domain is Ω = ( −1, 1) 3, and f and g are chosen so that the manufactured solution is 

u(x, y, z ) = 



1 − e−(1 −x)/ϵ   

1 − e−(1 −y)/ϵ   

1 − e−(1 −z)/ϵ 

cos ( π (x + y + z)) . (38) For this problem, we use the Xiao-Gimbutas quadrature [55] with degree pair (9 , 11) , again to improve data-efficiency relative to standard tensor-product rules. This mirrors the choice made in the preceding parabolic Poisson experiment. The AQ base mesh is a uniform grid with 5 partitions in each direction. To keep the total number of quadrature points within the memory limits of the V100 GPU, we use 

rtol = 1 × 10 −2 together with the tighter refresh_tol = 5 × 10 −2. The NN has 4 hidden layers of width 50 with tanh activation. Training is run for at most 15 ,000 epochs, with the Dirichlet penalty parameter fixed at 10 for consistency with the earlier experiments. The comparison in Fig. 24a and Fig. 24b further reinforces the advantage of the AQ strategy. It yields L2

and H1 errors that are slightly more than two orders of magnitude lower than the next best results, obtained by QMC (LHC ). As in the earlier experiments, the gain in H1 is slightly more pronounced than in L2.Consistently across the experiments with sharp solution profiles, QMC (LHC ) performs significantly better than MC and QMC (Halton). Moreover, although the training losses behave similarly across the considered approaches, the reference loss reveals much slower convergence for the non-adaptive methods. This creates a substantial generalisation gap and leads to errors that are orders of magnitude worse. These findings again highlight the importance of global quadrature error control for good generalisation, ensuring that the NN ’s approximation power is used to resolve the solution rather than wasted on overfitting. REFERENCES 33 

7. Conclusion 

We studied the role of numerical quadrature in residual-minimisation methods for neural approximation of PDE s. Our analysis separates approximation, quadrature and optimisation errors, and the resulting nonlinear Strang-type estimate shows that controlling the perturbation of the discrete residual loss is important for obtaining accurate approximations. Motivated by this analysis, we proposed an anisotropic, bisection-based h-adaptive composite quadrature with non-nested primal and reference rules, together with a refresh-based training strategy that rebuilds the quadrature only when an online error indicator exceeds a prescribed threshold. This combines explicit control of quadrature-induced perturbations with moderate computational cost throughout training. Across a broad set of benchmark problems, including elliptic, time-dependent and parametric PDE sin one, two and three spatial dimensions, the proposed approach reduced the gap between training and reference losses, used quadrature points more efficiently than non-adaptive strategies and delivered strong approximation accuracy in the tested problems. The experiments also indicate that only a small number of quadrature refreshes is needed relative to the total number of training iterations, making the approach practical for residual-based neural PDE solvers. 

References 

[1] G. Acosta and G. Monzón. “Interpolation error estimates in W 1,p for degenerate Q1 isoparametric elements”. In: Numerische Mathematik , 104.2 (2006), pp. 129–150. doi : 10.1007/s00211-006-0018-1 .[2] S. J. Anagnostopoulos, J. D. Toscano, N. Stergiopulos, and G. E. Karniadakis. “Learning in PINNs: Phase transition, diffusion equilibrium, and generalization”. In: Neural Networks , 193, 107983 (2026). 

doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2025.107983 .[3] M. Al-Baali. “Numerical Experience with a Class of Self-Scaling Quasi-Newton Algorithms”. In: Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications (1998), pp. 533–553. doi : 10 . 1023 / A : 1022608410710 .[4] S. Badia, W. Li, and A. F. Martín. “Adaptive finite element interpolated neural networks”. In: 

Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 437, 117806 (2025). doi : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2025.117806 .[5] S. Badia, W. Li, and A. F. Martín. “Compatible finite element interpolated neural networks”. In: 

Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 439, 117889 (2025). doi : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2025.117889 .[6] S. Badia and F. Verdugo. “Gridap: An extensible Finite Element toolbox in Julia”. In: Journal of Open Source Software , 5.52, 2520 (2020). doi : 10.21105/joss.02520 .[7] S. Berrone, C. Canuto, and M. Pintore. “Variational Physics Informed Neural Networks: the Role of Quadratures and Test Functions”. In: Journal of Scientific Computing , 92.3, 100 (2022). doi :

10.1007/s10915-022-01950-4 .[8] T. Besard, C. Foket, and B. De Sutter. “Effective Extensible Programming: Unleashing Julia on GPUs”. In: IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems (2018). doi : 10.1109/TPDS. 2018.2872064 . arXiv: 1712.03112 [cs.PL] .[9] J. Bezanson, A. Edelman, S. Karpinski, and V. B. Shah. “Julia: A Fresh Approach to Numerical Computing”. In: SIAM Review , 59.1 (2017), pp. 65–98. doi : 10.1137/141000671 .[10] Z. Cai, J. Chen, M. Liu, and X. Liu. “Deep least-squares methods: An unsupervised learning-based numerical method for solving elliptic PDEs”. In: Journal of Computational Physics , 420, 109707 (2020). doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2020.109707 .[11] S. Danisch and J. Krumbiegel. “Makie.jl: Flexible high-performance data visualization for Julia”. In: 

Journal of Open Source Software , 6.65 (2021), p. 3349. doi : 10.21105/joss.03349 .[12] T. De Ryck, S. Lanthaler, and S. Mishra. “On the approximation of functions by tanh neural networks”. In: Neural Networks , 143 (2021), pp. 732–750. doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet. 2021.08.015 .[13] M. Dissanayake and N. Phan-Thien. “Neural-network-based approximations for solving partial differential equations”. In: Communications in Numerical Methods in Engineering , 10.3 (1994), pp. 195–201. doi : https://doi.org/10.1002/cnm.1640100303 .REFERENCES 34 

[14] A. Ern and J. - L. Guermond. Finite Elements II . 1st ed. Springer Cham, 2021. doi : https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-030-56923-5 .[15] M. Feischl and F. Zehetgruber. “Computational Math with Neural Networks is Hard”. In: arXiv pre-print repository (2025). Referred pre-print version - [v1] . arXiv: 2505.17751 [math.NA] . url :

https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.17751 .[16] A. Genz and A. Malik. “Remarks on algorithm 006: An adaptive algorithm for numerical integration over an N-dimensional rectangular region”. In: Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics ,6.4 (1980), pp. 295–302. doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/0771-050X(80)90039-X .[17] A. Genz. “An adaptive numerical integration algorithm for simplices”. In: Computing in the 90’s .Ed. by N. A. Sherwani, E. de Doncker, and J. A. Kapenga. New York, NY: Springer New York, 1991, pp. 279–285. url : https://doi.org/10.1007/BFb0038504 .[18] A. Genz and R. Cools. “An adaptive numerical cubature algorithm for simplices”. In: ACM Trans. Math. Softw. , 29.3 (2003), pp. 297–308. doi : 10.1145/838250.838254 .[19] U. Ghia, K. Ghia, and C. Shin. “High-Re solutions for incompressible flow using the Navier-Stokes equations and a multigrid method”. In: Journal of Computational Physics , 48.3 (1982), pp. 387–411. 

doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/0021-9991(82)90058-4 .[20] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio. “Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks”. In: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics .Ed. by Y. W. Teh and M. Titterington. Vol. 9. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy: PMLR, 2010, pp. 249–256. url : https://proceedings.mlr. press/v9/glorot10a.html .[21] J. L. Guermond. “A Finite Element Technique for Solving First-Order PDEs in Lp”. In: SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis , 42.2 (2004), pp. 714–737. doi : 10.1137/S0036142902417054 .[22] W. W. Hager and H. Zhang. “Algorithm 851: CG_DESCENT, a conjugate gradient method with guaranteed descent”. In: ACM Trans. Math. Softw. , 32.1 (2006), pp. 113–137. doi : 10.1145/ 1132973.1132979 .[23] M. Innes. “Don’t Unroll Adjoint: Differentiating SSA-Form Programs”. In: arXiv pre-print repository 

(2019). Referred pre-print version - [v4] . url : https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1810. 07951 .[24] M. Innes. “Flux: Elegant machine learning with Julia”. In: Journal of Open Source Software , 3.25, 602 (2018). doi : 10.21105/joss.00602 .[25] S. G. Johnson. The HCubature.jl package for multi-dimensional adaptive integration in Julia .

https://github.com/JuliaMath/HCubature.jl . 2017. [26] E. Kiyani, K. Shukla, J. F. Urbán, J. Darbon, and G. E. Karniadakis. “Optimizing the optimizer for physics-informed neural networks and Kolmogorov-Arnold networks”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 446, 118308 (2025). doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/j. cma.2025.118308 .[27] A. S. Krishnapriyan, A. Gholami, S. Zhe, R. M. Kirby, and M. W. Mahoney. “Characterizing possible failure modes in physics-informed neural networks”. In: arXiv pre-print repository (2021). Referred pre-print version - [v2] . url : https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2109.01050 .[28] I. Lagaris, A. Likas, and D. Fotiadis. “Artificial neural networks for solving ordinary and partial differential equations”. In: IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , 9.5 (1998), pp. 987–1000. doi :

10.1109/72.712178 .[29] Z. Li et al. “Fourier Neural Operator for Parametric Partial Differential Equations”. In: arXiv pre-print repository (2021). Referred pre-print version - [v3] . url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.08895 .[30] M. Liu, Z. Cai, and J. Chen. “Adaptive two-layer ReLU neural network: I. Best least-squares approximation”. In: Computers & Mathematics with Applications , 113 (2022), pp. 34–44. doi :

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2022.03.005 .[31] M. Liu, Z. Cai, and K. Ramani. “Deep Ritz method with adaptive quadrature for linear elasticity”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 415, 116229 (2023). doi : https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2023.116229 .[32] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, and G. E. Karniadakis. “Learning nonlinear operators via DeepONet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators”. In: Nature Machine Intelligence , 3.3 (2021), pp. 218–229. REFERENCES 35 

[33] A. Magueresse and S. Badia. “Adaptive quadratures for nonlinear approximation of low-dimensional PDEs using smooth neural networks”. In: Computers & Mathematics with Applications , 162 (2024), pp. 1–21. doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2024.02.041 .[34] W. F. Mitchell. NIST Adaptive Mesh Refinement (AMR) Benchmark Problems . Last updated March 6, 2018. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). 2013. url : https://math.nist. gov/amr-benchmark/index.html (visited on 12/22/2025). [35] P. K. Mogensen and A. N. Riseth. “Optim: A mathematical optimization package for Julia”. In: 

Journal of Open Source Software , 3.24, 615 (2018). doi : 10.21105/joss.00615 .[36] W. J. Morokoff and R. E. Caflisch. “Quasi-Monte Carlo Integration”. In: Journal of Computational Physics , 122.2 (1995), pp. 218–230. doi : https://doi.org/10.1006/jcph.1995.1209 .[37] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. Karniadakis. “Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations”. In: Journal of Computational Physics , 378 (2019), pp. 686–707. doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jcp.2018.10.045 .[38] J. A. Rivera, J. M. Taylor, Á. J. Omella, and D. Pardo. “On quadrature rules for solving Partial Differential Equations using Neural Networks”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 393, 114710 (2022). doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2022.114710 .[39] S. Rojas, P. Maczuga, J. Muñoz-Matute, D. Pardo, and M. Paszyński. “Robust Variational Physics-Informed Neural Networks”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 425, 116904 (2024). doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2024.116904 .[40] I. Sakiotis et al. “PAGANI: a parallel adaptive GPU algorithm for numerical integration”. In: 

Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis . SC ’21. St. Louis, Missouri: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021. doi :

10.1145/3458817.3476198 .[41] J. Sirignano and K. Spiliopoulos. “DGM: A deep learning algorithm for solving partial differential equations”. In: Journal of Computational Physics , 375 (2018), pp. 1339–1364. doi : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2018.08.029 .[42] M. Tonarelli, S. Riva, P. Benedusi, F. Ferrandi, and R. Krause. “Adaptive Multidimensional Quadrature on Multi-GPU Systems”. In: arXiv pre-print repository (2025). Referred pre-print version - [v1] .arXiv: 2511.01573 [cs.DC] . url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.01573 .[43] J. D. Toscano, D. T. Chen, V. Oommen, J. Darbon, and G. E. Karniadakis. “A Variational Framework for Residual-Based Adaptivity in Neural PDE Solvers and Operator Learning”. In: arXiv pre-print repository (2025). Referred pre-print version - [v2] . arXiv: 2509.14198 [cs.LG] . url :

https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.14198 .[44] J. F. Urbán, P. Stefanou, and J. A. Pons. “Unveiling the optimization process of physics informed neural networks: How accurate and competitive can PINNs be?” In: Journal of Computational Physics , 523, 113656 (2025). doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2024.113656 .[45] P. van Dooren and L. de Ridder. “An adaptive algorithm for numerical integration over an n-dimensional cube”. In: Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics , 2.3 (1976), pp. 207–217. 

doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/0771-050X(76)90005-X .[46] F. Verdugo and S. Badia. “The software design of Gridap: A Finite Element package based on the Julia JIT compiler”. In: Computer Physics Communications , 276, 108341 (2022). doi :

10.1016/j.cpc.2022.108341 .[47] S. Wang, A. K. Bhartari, B. Li, and P. Perdikaris. “Gradient Alignment in Physics-informed Neural Networks: A Second-Order Optimization Perspective”. In: The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems . 2025. url : https://openreview.net/forum?id= iweeVl1RHU .[48] S. Wang, B. Li, Y. Chen, and P. Perdikaris. “PirateNets: physics-informed deep learning with residual adaptive networks”. In: J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 25.1, 402 (2024). url : https://dl.acm.org/doi/ 10.5555/3722577.3722979 .[49] S. Wang, S. Sankaran, H. Wang, and P. Perdikaris. “An Expert’s Guide to Training Physics-informed Neural Networks”. In: arXiv pre-print repository (2023). Referred pre-print version - [v1] . arXiv: 

2308.08468 [cs.LG] . url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08468 .REFERENCES 36 

[50] S. Wang, Y. Teng, and P. Perdikaris. “Understanding and Mitigating Gradient Flow Pathologies in Physics-Informed Neural Networks”. In: SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , 43.5 (2021), A3055–A3081. doi : 10.1137/20M1318043 . eprint: https://doi.org/10.1137/20M1318043 .[51] S. Wang, X. Yu, and P. Perdikaris. “When and why PINNs fail to train: A neural tangent kernel perspective”. In: Journal of Computational Physics , 449, 110768 (2022). doi : https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jcp.2021.110768 .[52] Z. Wang, X. Meng, X. Jiang, H. Xiang, and G. E. Karniadakis. “Solution multiplicity and effects of data and eddy viscosity on Navier-Stokes solutions inferred by physics-informed neural networks”. In: arXiv pre-print repository (2023). Referred pre-print version - [v1] . arXiv: 2309 . 06010 [physics.flu-dyn] . url : https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.06010 .[53] C. L. Wight and J. Zhao. “Solving Allen-Cahn and Cahn-Hilliard Equations Using the Adaptive Physics Informed Neural Networks”. In: Communications in Computational Physics , 29.3 (2021), pp. 930–954. doi : 10.4208/cicp.OA-2020-0086 .[54] F. Witherden and P. Vincent. “On the identification of symmetric quadrature rules for finite element methods”. In: Computers & Mathematics with Applications , 69.10 (2015), pp. 1232–1241. doi :

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2015.03.017 .[55] H. Xiao and Z. Gimbutas. “A numerical algorithm for the construction of efficient quadrature rules in two and higher dimensions”. In: Computers & Mathematics with Applications , 59.2 (2010), pp. 663–676. doi : https://doi.org/10.1016/j.camwa.2009.10.027 .