Title: Equation-Free Digital Twins for Nonlinear Structural Dynamics

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.00950v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 00:09:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# Equation-Free Digital Twins for Nonlinear Structural Dynamics 

Mohammad Mahdi Abaei ∗1, Ahmad BahooToroody 1, Arttu Poloj¨ arvi 1, Heikki Remes 1, Ulf Tyge Tygesen 2, Mikko Suominen 1, and Michael Beer 3

> 1

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Marine Technology and Arctic Group, Aalto University, Finland 

> 2

Independent Expert, Digital Twin Technology, Ribe, Denmark 

> 3

Institute for Risk and Reliability, Leibniz University Hannover, Germany 

Abstract 

Monitoring high-dimensional engineering structures in extreme environments is funda-mentally limited not only by nonlinearity, but also by the convergence of non-stationary excitation, nonlinear structural kinematics, and complex stochastic forcing. Traditional model-based and black-box data-driven frameworks often fail to resolve such dynamic be-havior in real-time or lead to the curse of dimensionality during sensor failure. This paper introduces a rank-optimized Digital Twin framework based on Koopman Operator Theory, utilizing Hankel-matrix embeddings and dynamic mode decomposition to bridge the gap be-tween high-fidelity physics and real-time edge processing. By lifting operational data into a linear invariant subspace, the model achieves an autonomous, input-blind reconstruction of the structural state without requiring a priori mass or stiffness matrices. The framework was validated using an NREL 5MW Spar-Buoy FOWT model—representing a frontier challenge in coupled aero-hydro-servo-elastic dynamics . Results demonstrate that the rank-optimized manifold effectively unmixes structural resonances from deterministic 3P rotor harmonics, a task where standard subspace identification typically fails under col-ored noise. Furthermore, a rolling-horizon virtual sensing strategy achieved high-fidelity reconstruction ( R2 > 0.95) at critical structural hotspots even with a low data assimilation frequency of 1 Hz, with accuracy exceeding 0.99 at higher sampling rates. By quantifying the physical Lyapunov time ( ≈ 1.0 s), this study defines the fundamental predictability horizon required to navigate the system’s Information Barrier. This physical constraint confirms that the method is ideally suited for modern, high-frequency (50 Hz) condition monitoring sys-tems, offering a computationally efficient and resilient Digital Twin solution for the real-time identification of complex structural dynamics. 

Keywords: Data-driven modeling, Operator-theoretic learning, Machine Learning, Dynamic Mode Decomposition, Koopman Theory, Digital Twin, System Identification, Nonlinear Dy-namics 

# Nomenclature 

DMD Dynamic Mode Decomposition DOF Degree of Freedom EDMD Extended Dynamic Mode Decomposi-tion FOWT Floating Offshore Wind Turbine OMA Operational Modal Analysis POD Proper Orthogonal Decomposition SHM Structural Health Monitoring SSI-COV Stochastic Subspace Identification SVD Singular Value Decomposition OLC Operational Load Cases 

> ∗

Corresponding author: mohammad.abaei@aalto.fi 

1                                             

> arXiv:2605.00950v1 [eess.SP] 1 May 2026 AFull Koopman evolution operator ˜AReduced evolution operator
> bkModal amplitude vector at step k
> CDamping/Coriolis matrix
> dTime-delay embedding depth
> fNonlinear evolution map
> Faero Aerodynamic forcing vector
> Fhydro Hydrodynamic forcing vector
> g(x)Scalar observable function
> HHankel matrix
> H1,2Time-shifted Hankel matrices
> Iavail Indices of active sensors
> KInfinite Koopman operator
> KStiffness matrix
> MMass matrix
> NTotal number of snapshots
> pTotal sensors (Full state)
> qActive sensors ( q < p )
> qGeneralized coordinates
> rTruncation rank
> SSensor selection matrix
> uGeneralized speeds
> UrLeft singular vectors (POD)
> VrRight singular vectors
> VWVandermonde matrix
> wjEigenvectors of ˜A
> WRolling horizon window
> y(t)Sensor measurements ˜ykTime-delay embedded state ˜yobs kSparse observation vector ˆYrec Reconstructed trajectory ∆tSampling interval
> ζjDamping ratio
> λjContinuous eigenvalue
> μjDiscrete eigenvalue
> ΛEigenvalue matrix
> ΣrSingular value matrix
> ΦFull Koopman modes
> Φaug Augmented mode matrix
> Φphys Physical mode shapes
> Φsparse Sparse mode basis
> ωjAngular frequency
> σiStandard deviation (sensor)
> †Pseudoinverse operator

# 1 Introduction 

Ensuring the safety and reliability of engineering structures in harsh environments, typical for aerospace and marine applications, relies on structural health monitoring (SHM). The monitor-ing has traditionally been performed by using networks of sensors installed at critical locations to track structural behavior. However, in extreme conditions, physical sensors are prone to failure due to moisture ingress, signal drift, and mechanical damage, which may leave operators with potentially dangerous blind spots. As in addition the dense sensor networks are often impractical to deploy, there is a drive towards virtual sensing approaches, where a limited set of measurements is used in combination with algorithms for numerical prediction of the full state of a structure [3]. Development of such digital twins has one critical bottleneck. Modern structures are often highly flexible and driven by chaotic, nonlinear forces, making it challeng-ing to achieve digital twins that are both physically accurate and computationally efficient for real-time monitoring. Conventional digital twins have relied on model-based estimators like the Kalman filter and its augmented variants (KF and AKF) [6, 25–27]. Often these rely on restrictive Markovian assumptions plug into Bayesian filtering and straggle in states estimations as physical assets de-grade [4], motivating exploration of alternative probabilistic frameworks. These include particle filters, unscented Kalman filters, and Gaussian process latent force models, which suffer from 

O(N 3) scaling or massive particle counts that overwhelm standard on-site computing nodes [2,5]. This creates a real-time paradox; fast models lack precision, while high-fidelity models lack speed [18]. To fix this, engineers often resort model tuning artificially to match a digital twin with measured sensor data [11]. Such tuned models may lead to parametric dishonesty and violate the underlying physical constraints, masking potential structural damage [11]. Similar to Bayesian filtering, data-driven identification methods such as stochastic subspace identification (SSI-COV) and modal expansion are limited by their underlying assumptions, linearity and stationarity that fail to capture the chaotic behavior. SSI-COV assumes white-noise excitation whereas environmental inputs are typically colored, leading to biased outputs with erroneous spurious structural modes [21–24, 49]. Standard subspace methods frequently 2conflate deterministic operational harmonics with the structure’s true internal resonances [33]. Modal expansion [12], on the other hand, suffers from a circular dependency on uncalibrated finite element models and requires more sensors than modes of interest, a constraint rarely met in sparsely instrumented structures. Furthermore, these methods are stationary and fail to resolve time-varying phenomena such as gyroscopic stiffening. Even more recent subspace approaches, such as gappy sensors [3] or Bayesian calibration, remain computationally burdening for real-time applications, often requiring days to converge [4]. To resolve the conflict between computational efficiency and physical accuracy, SHM is shift-ing towards identifying spatiotemporal coherent structures directly from sensor data [39]. His-torically, structural engineering relied on linear autoregressive and state-space models [33], which fundamentally fail in nonlinear or chaotic operational regimes of high-energy environments [30]. While recent reviews of data assimilation frameworks [13, 17] highlight the robustness and high predictive performance of machine learning used for this task, modern deep learning architectures also yield inductive biases detrimental to structural assessment. For instance, Convolutional neu-ral networks are fundamentally constrained by a Euclidean inductive bias, often struggling to resolve the non-Euclidean topology of sparse sensor arrays and imposing a locality bias that fails to capture long-range modal couplings [42]. Conversely, graph neural networks and Transformers are prone to ”oversmoothing”—a mathematical convergence that suppresses the high-frequency resonances critical for detecting early-stage structural degradation [20], or implicitly filter out transient features, restricting the class of representable dynamics and potentially masking the chaotic signatures essential for a true Digital Twin [20]Further, the unconstrained machine learningblack box models lack causality and may generate predictions that violate conservation laws or yield physically impossible structural responses [14–16]. Even physics-enhanced grey box models struggle to capture structural dynamics in unknown environmental conditions [34], where it is more crucial for transforming digital twin concept and big data in damage detection and lifetime extension [35], with vast majority of the work on them relying on weak baselines that inflate perceived efficacy [36]. Related to these issues, Sanchis-Agudo et al. [19] importantly demonstrated that the complex self-attention layers in transformer architectures converge to an approximate simple linear state transition operator. This suggests that operator-theoretic frame-works can achieve predictive performance comparable to modern machine learning approaches more transparently and efficiently, while avoiding their complexity and limited interpretability. Koopman operator theory provides a robust and general mathematical framework that bal-ances computational speed and physical fidelity by lifting nonlinear dynamics into a higher-dimensional functional space where their evolution is linear [29, 38, 41]. Within this framework, the focus is switched from the nonlinear state-space to the linear evolution of observables in space, which allows standard eigen-decomposition to characterize complex and chaotic attrac-tors. The result is a data-driven and equation-free model, which avoids the computational cost of solving explicit partial differential equations while maintaining the interpretability of classical modal analysis [37]. Koopman embeddings and dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) have been effectively used in fluid dynamics [40], power forecasting [28], and rigid body motions [30]. This paper presents a foundational operator-theoretic framework for the identification of high-dimensional flexible structures, specifically addressing the coupled dynamics inherent in active control systems, random vibration loads and rotating machinery. Although the work we present is generalizable, we demonstrate an application for floating offshore wind turbines (FOWT). Overall, developing a successful real-time digital twin for FOWT represents a stringent test for any SHM approach in sparse instrumentation environment. They are structures operat-ing under extreme stochastic forcing and exhibit high-dimensional structural coupling, which commonly cause the traditional physics-based models to fail, shifting their modeling towards data-driven paradigms [30]. Reduced order modelling of a FOWT remains challenging also due to hydrodynamic memory effects, distributed wave loading, and highly colored wind–wave spec-3tra [4, 8, 10], with further challenges including coupled aero-hydro-servo-elastic dynamics and active control inducing negative damping [1]. While Koopman framework and DMD have been successfully applied to capture ship maneuvering and slamming loads [30, 39], they have never been investigated to systems with coupled dynamics and 1P/3P rotor harmonics present with FOWTs [33]. Furthermore, existing DMD variants lack a mechanism for chaotic divergence and often fail to forecast irregular waves outside their training region [29]. Also, considering FOWT monitoring challenge in larger fleets, it is also usual to have only about 10% of turbines in an offshore farm are equipped for SHM sensors [7]; thus, a scalable digital twin must not only be resilient to local sensor failures [3] but also capable of closing this fleet-wide monitoring gap by leveraging validated models for unmonitored assets. In more detail, we introduce an equation-free digital twin framework based on a rank-optimized Koopman-Hankel embedding. By learning the linear invariant subspace of the sys-tem directly from the operational data, the model introduced eliminates the need for a priori mass-stiffness matrices, while maintaining the physical interpretability. The work departs from the input-output forward-forecasting paradigms prevalent in current operator-theoretic liter-ature [29, 39], where we formulate an autonomous, output-only inverse reconstruction. This transition to an input-blind architecture enables virtual sensing at critical hotspots without the need for auxiliary environmental sensors.Furthermore, rather than employing computationally intensive statistical bootstrapping, the current framework utilizes a deterministic spectral rank-optimization strategy. By applying hard thresholding to singular values within the Koopman manifold, structural dynamics are mathematically decoupled from high-energy stochastic noise in a single pass, significantly reducing the overhead for real-time edge processing. Beyond numeri-cal accuracy, the framework provides a mechanistic bridge to underlying aero-hydro-servo-elastic coupled phenomena. It is demonstrated that the rank-optimized manifold effectively unmixes structural resonances from the deterministic rotor harmonics (3P/6P) that routinely pollute vi-bration data. We also provide rigorous estimate for the Lyapunov time, the predictability horizon of a given system, which determines the data assimilation frequency required to maintain digital twin accuracy. Crucially, the theoretical limits of this data-driven approach are addressed by acknowledging the Information Barrier [9] and quantifying the physical Lyapunov time ( ≈ 1.0s) of the chaotic system. This provides a rigorous basis for determining the data assimilation frequency required to keep the Digital Twin synchronized under unseen environmental forcing. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 details the OpenFAST environment and the Hankel-DMD mathematical formulation. Section 3 validates the system identification against linearized baselines, while Section 4 evaluates virtual sensing and spatial reconstruction. Finally, Section 5 discusses the implications for real-time SHM and fatigue life estimation. 

# 2 Methodology 

To develop a robust Digital Twin, a training dataset was generated using OpenFAST , modeling the NREL 5MW wind turbine on the OC3 Hywind Spar platform [43]. The simulation setup was explicitly designed to capture the chaotic, coupled nature of the offshore environment essential for identification. A schematic of the modeled coupled aero-hydro-servo-elastic system is presented in Figure 1. 

2.1 Governing Dynamics 

The FOWT dynamic behavior is governed by the multi-body equations of motion derived via Kane’s method [44]: 

M(q, t ) ˙ u + C(q, u, t )u + K(q, t )q = Faero + Fhydro + Fmooring (1) 4where q and u represent the generalized coordinates and speeds, respectively. Unlike linear formulations, the mass, damping, and stiffness matrices ( M, C, K) are time-varying, driven by the large-angle rigid body motion of the platform and the state-dependent nature of the aerodynamic and hydrodynamic loads. To ensure the data-driven model captures these non-linearities, the forcing terms in Equa-tion (1) were rigorously selected to excite the full frequency spectrum. Full wave loading was applied via the Fhydro term using a JONSWAP spectrum (0 .05 −0.25 Hz). As noted by Robertson et al. [46], the tower Side-to-Side (SS) mode lacks significant aerodynamic damping compared to the Fore-Aft direction, which need to be identified accurately. Consequently, wave-induced rolling acts as the dominant energy source required to excite and identify this mode; neglecting it would yield non-physical damping estimates. Simultaneously, turbulent wind fields generated by TurbSim were utilized to provide broadband aerodynamic excitation via Faero , ensuring that structural modes are continuously perturbed to mimic the white noise assumption required for robust spectral identification. To reconstruct the system phase space without accessing internal states, the tower was instru-mented with a distributed array of virtual sensors. The state vector is constructed from Bending Moments, which serve as a direct proxy for stress and fatigue, and Absolute Accelerations, which capture the total inertial response including the coupling with the platform’s rigid-body motion. This selection allows the Hankel-DMD framework to effectively learn the operational physics directly from physical outputs, bypassing the unmeasurable internal generalized coordinates. 

Figure 1: Schematic of the Spar FOWT. The diagram illustrates the coupled aero-hydro-servo-elastic system modeled in OpenFAST. 

2.2 Linearization 

Since non-linear time-domain simulations do not explicitly output modal properties, a theoretical baseline is established using the OpenFAST linearization module. The non-linear dynamics are linearized about a steady-state equilibrium, yielding a linear State-Space model describing the evolution of perturbations ∆ x:∆ ˙ x = A∆x + B∆uin (2) 5where ∆ uin represents the perturbation inputs from aerodynamic, hydrodynamic, and control loads. The system dynamics are governed by the state matrix A, which adopts a canonical block structure: 

A =

 0 I

−M−1K −M−1C



(3) A distinct feature of this formulation is that OpenFAST outputs stiffness ( K) and damping ( C)pre-multiplied by the inverse mass matrix ( M−1), rather than as isolated matrices. The theo-retical natural frequencies and mode shapes are subsequently derived by solving the eigenvalue problem: 

Av = λv (4) The resulting eigenvalues ( λ) and eigenvectors ( v) serve as the Ground Truth for this study. By comparing the data-driven Hankel-DMD predictions against this baseline, the Digital Twin’s ability to capture the fundamental physics is rigorously quantified. 

2.3 Mathematical Framework 

To bridge the gap between rigorous physics and data-driven efficiency, the FOWT is modeled as a dynamical system evolving on a high-dimensional nonlinear manifold M. While OpenFAST accurately solves the coupled equations of motion, the resulting evolution is computationally expensive. The system can be viewed as a discrete-time map f : M → M where the state xk

evolves as [37]: 

xk+1 = f (xk) (5) To enable real-time prediction, Koopman operator theory shifts the perspective from the state space M to the space of observables . It posits the existence of an infinite-dimensional linear operator K that acts on scalar observable functions g : M → R (such as sensor measure-ments), satisfying [37]: 

Kg(xk) = g(f (xk)) = g(xk+1 ) (6) This relationship, illustrated in Figure 2, establishes a commutative property: evolving the complex state nonlinearly on the manifold is equivalent to measuring the state first and evolving the observations linearly. In the discrete formulation adopted here, the continuous flow sys-tem dynamic is effectively replaced by the map f , and the infinite-dimensional operator K is approximated by the finite matrix A identified via Hankel-DMD. In practice, the full state x is unknown. Instead, we define a vector of available sensor measurements. This implies that the nonlinear dynamics in the state space can be ”lifted” to a linear evolution in the space of observables. The objective of the algorithm is to find a finite-dimensional approximation of koopman operator, denoted as A, which governs the time-evolution of the available sensor measurements yk ∈ Rp:

yk+1 ≈ Ay k (7) 

2.3.1 Time-Delay Embedding 

In complex aero-hydro-elastic systems, the instantaneous sensor vector yk (dimension p) is often insufficient to capture the full system state due to unmeasured variables (e.g., wake memory). This violates the assumption required for linear modeling. In accordance with Takens’ embedding theorem, the observation vector is augmented by stacking d time-shifted copies of the data into a single column. This creates a ”tall” vector that 6Figure 2: The evolution of states x in the vector space M (top layer) and observables g(x) in the functional space (bottom layer). The Koopman operator K enables linear evolution of the observables, bypassing the nonlinear map f .encodes the trajectory history. Let yk ∈ Rp denote the multivariate state vector at time step k,containing measurements from all p sensors simultaneously. For a system with p sensors and a delay depth of d, the augmented state vector ˜ yk is constructed as: ˜yk =

h

y⊤ 

> k

, y⊤

> k+1

, . . . , y⊤

> k+d−1

i⊤

∈ Rpd (8) Note that each block entry yk is itself a vector of dimension p. The full Hankel matrix H

is then formed by arranging these columns sequentially in time. Let ∆ t denote the sampling interval. The discrete snapshot vector at time step k is defined as yk ≡ y(tk), and the subsequent snapshot at tk+1 = tk + ∆ t is denoted as yk+1 . Therefore the first rows, from 1 to , p are the current snapshot, and the rows from p + 1 to 2 p are the next ( tk + ∆ t) time frame. The full Hankel matrix H is constructed by arranging these augmented vectors as columns [39]. The number of columns m is determined by the total snapshots minus the delay depth (m = N − d + 1): 

H =



| | |

˜y1 ˜y2 . . . ˜ym

| | |

 =



y1 y2 . . . ym

y2 y3 . . . ym+1 

... ... . . . ...

yd yd+1 . . . ym+d−1

 ∈ Rpd ×m (9) To identify the dynamics, this matrix is split into two time-shifted matrices, H1 (the current state) and H2 (the future state): 

H1 = H[: , 1 : m − 1] , H2 = H[: , 2 : m] (10) Here, H1 contains the snapshots from time 1 to m − 1, and H2 contains the snapshots from time 2 to m.The objective is to identify a linear operator A satisfying AH 1 ≈ H2. To avoid the computa-tional cost and overfitting risks of the high-dimensional operator, a reduced proxy ˜A is computed by projecting the dynamics onto the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) modes of the in-put snapshots ( H1 ≈ UrΣrV∗ 

> r

). This projection filters the operator onto the invariant subspace, yielding the final computational form via similarity transformation [38]: ˜A = U∗ 

> r

AU r ≈ U∗

> r



H2H†

> 1



Ur = U∗ 

> r

H2VrΣ−1 

> r

(11) 7The (23) solves the linear inverse problem, where H† 

> 1

is given by ( HT 

> 1

H1)−1HT 

> 1

. This ap-proach acts as a specific instance of Extended DMD (EDMD) on time-delay coordinates, where the POD algorithm recovers the underlying nonlinear attractor as illustrated in Figure 3. 

Figure 3: Extraction of spatio-temporal coherent structures from wind turbine sensor data via Hankel Matrix factorization. 

2.3.2 Spectral Decomposition 

The resulting matrix ˜A ∈ Cr×r serves as the Reduced Evolution Operator. Its eigen-decomposition of ˜Aw j = μj wj yields the discrete eigenvalues μj , which characterize the system’s temporal evo-lution per time step. For physical interpretation, these discrete values are mapped to continuous-time eigenvalues 

λj via the sampling interval ∆ t:

λj = ln( μj )∆t = σj + iω j (12) From these, the natural frequency ( fj = ωj /2π) and damping ratio ( ζj = −σj /|λj |) are derived. The eigenvectors wj obtained from the reduced operator ˜A, represent the system’s dynam-ics modes in the low-dimensional subspace defined by the POD modes Ur. The Koopman Modes ( Φaug ) are recovered by projecting the reduced eigenvectors wj back onto the full high-dimensional space: 

Φaug = UrW (13) Here, the decomposition components play distinct roles. The POD basis modes ( Ur) serve as the principal orthogonal building blocks of the system’s energy, representing generic spatial patterns derived purely from data variance. To isolate single-frequency behaviors, the reduced eigenvectors ( W) dictate the precise linear combination of these POD modes required to syn-thesize a dynamic mode. Finally, the temporal evolution is governed entirely by the diagonal matrix Λ = diag( μ1, . . . , μ r), which acts as the computational engine for the signal reconstruc-tion module ( xk+1 = Λx k). The augmented eigenvector Φaug encodes the mode’s evolution across the delay window as a stack of time-shifted projections: 

Φaug = ϕ⊤

> phys

, (λϕphys )⊤, . . . , (λd−1ϕphys )⊤⊤ (14) Since this structure contains the full history, the static Physical Mode Shape is retrieved simply by truncating the vector to its first p rows: 

Φphys = Φaug [1 : p, :] (15) 82.3.3 Projections on Koopman Eigenfunctions and Signal Reconstruction 

With the physical mode shapes Φphys and discrete eigenvalues μj identified, we can now formu-late the signal reconstruction. In the context of Koopman operator theory, any scalar observable 

g : M → R (e.g., a single sensor measurement) can be expanded in the basis of Koopman eigen-functions. In the continuous formulation, an observable ψ(x) is projected as [37]: 

ψ(x) = 

> ∞

X

> j=1

vj φj (x) (16) where vj are the scalar Koopman modes and φj (x) are the eigenfunctions. In our discrete, finite-dimensional data-driven framework, this projection translates to recon-structing the state vector yk at time step k. The infinite sum is approximated by the truncated rank r, and the continuous evolution eλj t is replaced by the discrete power of eigenvalues μkj .The reconstruction equation is given by [29]: 

yk ≈

> r

X

> j=1

ϕj μkj bj (17) Here, ϕj is the j-th column of the physical mode matrix Φphys (representing the spatial structure), and bj is the modal amplitude , which corresponds to the coefficient vj in the continuous theory. The vector b = [ b1, b 2, . . . , b r]T represents the projection of the initial system state onto the Koopman eigenbasis. It quantifies the weight or participation of each mode in the system’s response at t = 0. To construct b, we solve the linear inverse problem at the initial snapshot 

y1. Since the mode matrix Φphys is typically non-square ( p × r), we employ the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse ( †) to minimize the reconstruction error: 

b = Φ†

> phys

y1 (18) where y1 ∈ Rp denotes the initial snapshot vector containing the simultaneous measurements from all p sensors at time t = 0. The resulting vector b quantifies the initial modal partic-ipation factors at time zero, representing the optimal complex weights required to initialize the linear superposition of mode shapes such that the reconstructed state minimizes the error with respect to the observed initial condition. Once b is computed, the temporal evolution of the system is entirely determined by the linear superposition of these modes, allowing for future state prediction without reintegrating the nonlinear equations of motion. The spectral decomposition naturally separates the dynamics into a point spectrum (discrete structural modes) and a continuous spectrum (broadband turbulence). Hankel-DMD acts as a spectral filter, extracting the deterministic point spectrum while relegating stochastic environ-mental interactions to the residual term rk:

yk =

> r

X

> j=1

ϕj μkj bj

| {z }

> Structural Modes

+ rk

|{z} 

> Turbulence (Residual)

(19) This separation is advantageous for SHM, as it isolates the structural health signature from the chaotic wave wind-structure interaction noise. 

2.4 Virtual Sensing 

The problem of estimating missing sensor data—whether due to hardware failure or limited instrumentation—is mathematically formulated as a Gappy Data Reconstruction problem [3]. 9The central part of this framework is that the high-dimensional dynamics of the FOWT evolve on a low-dimensional linear invariant subspace . This subspace is spanned by the system’s global mode shapes ( Φ), which enforce a rigid spatial coupling across the structure. Consequently, the measurements from surviving sensors implicitly contain the information of the missing locations, as both are strictly correlated through these fixed modal patterns. Let the full state vector at time step k be denoted by ˜ yk ∈ Rpd (the time-delay embedded history of all p sensors). In a failure scenario, we only observe a subset of q active sensors ( q < p ). We define a Selection Matrix (or Mask) S ∈ { 0, 1}qd ×pd which is a binary matrix constructed by removing the rows corresponding to the failed sensors from the identity matrix. The relationship between the full state and the sparse observation ˜ yobs k is given by: ˜yobs k = S˜yk (20) 

2.4.1 Sparse Basis Construction 

From the offline training phase (Section 2.3), the full Hankel-DMD modes Φ ∈ Cpd ×r will be obtain directly. These modes serve as the basis functions that govern the system’s trajectory. For any given time window, the time-delay embedded state vector ˜ yk can be reconstructed via the modal expansion: ˜yk ≈ Φb k (21) where bk ∈ Cr represents the effective modal amplitudes active at time step k. Note that while theoretical linear dynamics imply bk = Λkb0, in the virtual sensing framework, bk

will be estimated locally from the sparse sensor data to account for nonlinearities and external disturbances. In the virtual sensing scenario, the full vector ˜ yk will not be observed due to missing sensors. Instead, we construct a sparse embedded vector ˜yobs k by stacking the histories of only the q

available sensors out of p. Mathematically, this corresponds to keeping only the specific rows of the mode matrix Φ that align with the active sensors. Let Iavail denote the set of row indices in the Hankel matrix corresponding to the active sensors where selected from Selection Matrix S. We define the sparse mode basis Φ sparse ∈

Cqd ×r as: 

Φsparse = Φ[Iavail , :] = SΦ (22) 

2.4.2 Real-Time—Rolling Horizon Reconstruction 

To ensure robust reconstruction over the full duration t0 → tn, a rolling horizon strategy is employed in this study. Instead of estimating a single global amplitude vector, the algorithm updates the modal amplitudes dynamically as new data becomes available from the active sen-sors. The reconstruction proceeds via a rolling horizon scheme that alternates between calibration and prediction. First, at time step k, the sparse measurement history ˜ yobs k is used to calibrate the local modal amplitudes bk by solving the overdetermined system via the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse: 

bk = Φ† 

> sparse

˜yobs k (23) This step aligns the model with the instantaneous energy of the system. Next, to propa-gate the full state efficiently over the horizon W , a Vandermonde Matrix V W ∈ Cr×W is constructed, containing the time-evolution powers of the discrete eigenvalues μj :

VW =



1 μ1 . . . μW −11

... ... . . . ...1 μr . . . μW −1

> r

 (24) 10 The reconstructed trajectory ˆYrec ∈ Rp×W is then computed via a single vectorized matrix operation: ˆYrec = Re 

 Φphys 

| {z } 

> Mode Shapes

· diag( bk)

| {z }

> Mode Energy

· VW

|{z} 

> Time Evolution

 (25) Here, Φphys dictates the spatial mode shapes ( where the structure moves) obtained from the training model, which serve as invariant parameters, diag( bk) scales the energy ( how much the structure moves ), and VW governs the temporal dynamics ( when the structure moves ). This formulation replaces iterative time-stepping with efficient linear algebra, acting as a filter that continuously prevents drift. The complete computational procedure is summarized in Algo-rithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Data-Driven Virtual Sensing via Rolling Horizon Hankel-DMD 

1: Input: Raw Sensor Data Yraw ∈ Rp×N , Delay d, Rank r, Horizon W .2: Output: Reconstructed Full State ˆYrec .

— Phase I: Offline Training (System Identification) — 

3: Preprocessing: Apply zero-phase bandpass filter and Z-score normalization. 4: Embedding: Construct Hankel matrix H from training snapshots. 5: Decomposition: Compute Exact Hankel-DMD: 6: H1 = H[: , : −1] , H2 = H[: , 1 :] ▷ Time-shifted matrices 7: U, Σ, V∗ ← SVD( H1, rank = r)8: ˜A ← U∗H2VΣ −1 ▷ Reduced Operator 9: Compute discrete eigenvalues μ and modes Φ from ˜A.10: Partitioning: Isolate physical sensors and active subset: 11: Φphys ← Φ[1 : p, :] ▷ Physical shape (no delay) 12: ΦSparse ← Rows of Φphys corresponding to active sensors 

— Phase II: Online Virtual Sensing (Rolling Horizon) — 

13: Initialize k ← 014: while k < N do 

15: 1. Observation: 

16: Extract trajectory window ˜ yobs k from active sensors. 17: 2. Calibration (Inverse Problem): 

18: Estimate local modal amplitudes via pseudoinverse: 19: bk ← Φ† 

> sparse

˜yobs k

20: 3. Prediction (Matrix Propagation): 

21: Construct Vandermonde matrix VW from eigenvalues μ.22: Compute full state trajectory for window W :23: ˆYwin ← Re( Φphys · diag( bk ) · VW )24: 4. Update: 

25: Store ˆYwin into global output ˆYrec .26: k ← k + W ▷ Slide window forward 27: end while 

28: Return ˆYrec 

# 3 Results and Validation 

To validate the proposed physics-interpretable framework, the Hankel-DMD algorithm was ap-plied to a high-fidelity dataset representing the NREL 5MW Spar-Buoy under realistic opera-tional conditions. The analysis is structured to evaluate two critical capabilities of the Digital Twin: System Identification , which demonstrates the extraction of accurate structural pa-rameters (frequencies, damping, and mode shapes) from stochastic environmental noise, and 

real-time Virtual Sensing , which assesses the robust reconstruction of missing sensor fields under unseen operational regimes. 11 3.1 Operational Data and Sensor Configuration 

The foundation of this analysis is a high-fidelity dataset generated using the OpenFAST aero-hydro-elastic simulation tool. To ensure the data-driven model captures the full operational variance of the FOWT, simulations were conducted across 12 distinct Operational Load Cases (OLCs). 

3.1.1 Linearization vs. Operational Simulation 

A rigorous distinction is maintained between the theoretical baseline and the operational training data to quantify the impact of physical non-linearities: 

• Theoretical Baseline (Linear): The reference model was derived using the OpenFAST linearization module. To ensure convergence to a steady equilibrium, this configuration employs simplified physics as defined by quasi-static mooring (MAP++), steady uniform wind (12 m/s), and still water. This effectively freezes the turbine, providing a snapshot of stiffness and damping in a stationary state. 

• Operational Training Data (Non-Linear): In contrast, the Hankel-DMD training data utilizes the full non-linear capabilities of OpenFAST. These simulations incorpo-rate turbulent wind fields (TurbSim), irregular wave spectra (JONSWAP), hydrodynamic loads (BEM model), and crucially, dynamic mooring loads (FEAMooring). This setup captures the time-varying, stochastic nature of the floating system—including hysteresis and platform-tower coupling—ensuring the Digital Twin learns from the complex reality of operation rather than an idealized steady state. 

3.1.2 Operational Load Cases 

The study systematically varied wave parameters to cover four distinct sea states ( Hs ∈ [1 , 4] m) and three incidence angles (0 ◦, 45 ◦, 90 ◦) to excite coupled DOFs motions, as detailed in Table 1. The wind conditions were held constant at the rated speed (12 m/s) to maintain highest aerodynamic thrust (12 .1 rpm). Crucially, to ensure the Digital Twin generalizes to unseen conditions—a strict requirement for Virtual Sensing—the generated data were not utilized in their entirety for training. Instead, a randomized training ensemble was constructed by sampling from the global dataset. This stochastic selection strategy prevents the Hankel-DMD algorithm from overfitting to specific time-histories, forcing it to learn the underlying global operational variance. The remaining unobserved data were strictly reserved for the validation phase to test the reconstruction of missing sensor channels. 

3.1.3 Hybrid State Vector Formulation 

To ensure complete observability of the system dynamics, the state vector is constructed by fusing two distinct physical quantities: absolute acceleration and bending moment (derived from strain). For a planar analysis (e.g., fore-aft direction), this results in an 18-dimensional state vector xk at each time step tk:

xk =

 a1:9 (tk)

M1:9 (tk)



∈ R18 (26) This hybrid formulation offers a distinct advantage over single-modality approaches following the advantage of the Taken Embedding Theorem. Strain gauges provide excellent signal-to-noise ratios for elastic deformation modes, particularly the fundamental bending modes where curvature is high but acceleration may be low. Conversely, accelerometers capture the rigid-body 12 Table 1: Definition of Simulated Operational Load Cases. 

Case ID Hs (m) Tp (s) Dir ( ◦) Wind (m/s) 

1 1.0 6.0 0 12 2 1.0 9.0 45 12 3 1.0 12.0 90 12 4 2.0 8.0 0 12 5 2.0 10.0 45 12 6 2.0 14.0 90 12 7 3.0 10.0 0 12 8 3.0 12.0 45 12 9 3.0 16.0 90 12 10 4.0 9.0 0 12 11 4.0 12.0 45 12 12 4.0 20.0 90 12    

> Note: Wave Direction is defined relative to the wind vector, where 0 ◦is aligned with the wind (Fore-Aft dominant) and 90 ◦is perpendicular (Side-to-Side dominant).

platform dynamics and higher-frequency structural modes that induce small strains but generate significant inertial forces. Fusing them ensures the DMD operator A has full observability of both the slow, displacement-dominated dynamics (potential energy) and the fast, inertial-dominated dynamics (kinetic energy), thereby creating a complete digital twin of the structural state. 

3.1.4 Sensor Scope and Layout 

The study focuses on the tower substructure, instrumented with 9 virtual sensor nodes dis-tributed equidistantly along the height (10 m to 87 .6 m). While this work specifically targets tower dynamics, the proposed framework is inherently versatile; the state vector can be eas-ily expanded to include blade roots, mooring lines, or nacelle quantities without altering the underlying Hankel-DMD algorithm. Moreover, this data-driven architecture is not restricted to FOWT applications but is broadly applicable to any high-dimensional dynamical system exhibiting coherent spatiotemporal structures. The specific OpenFAST outputs utilized for the Fore-Aft (FA) and Side-to-Side (SS) analyses are detailed in Table 2. Table 2: OpenFAST Output Configuration for Hankel-DMD Analysis                       

> Channel Name Description Purpose in DMD Framework
> TwHt[1-9]MLxt Tower Local Side-to-Side Mo-ment Primary source for SS Strain Mode Shapes (captures curvature).
> TwHt[1-9]MLyt Tower Local Fore-Aft Moment Primary source for FA Strain Mode Shapes (captures curvature).
> TwHt[1-9]ALxt Tower Absolute Accel ( X-axis) Captures SS bending modes coupled with Platform Sway and Roll kinematics.
> TwHt[1-9]ALyt Tower Absolute Accel ( Y-axis) Captures FA bending modes coupled with Platform Surge and Pitch kinematics.

The overall architecture of the proposed Digital Twin model case study is illustrated in Figure 4, showing the transition from physical data acquisition to the virtual sensing module. The detailed computational procedure for the rolling horizon updates is formally summarized in Algorithm 1. 13 Figure 4: Schematic of the Data-Driven Virtual Sensing framework, detailing the data flow from the physical FOWT through offline Hankel-DMD training to the online rolling horizon loop for real-time full-state reconstruction. 

3.2 Data Preprocessing 

To ensure rigorous system identification, the raw sensor data Yraw ∈ Rp×N undergoes a robust preprocessing pipeline designed to isolate structural dynamics and standardize signal magni-tudes. First, high-frequency noise and low-frequency drift are removed using a 4th-order But-terworth bandpass filter (0 .25 − 5.0 Hz). Crucially, a zero-phase filtering scheme (forward-backward) is employed to strictly preserve the temporal alignment of peaks across sensors, a prerequisite for accurate mode shape identification: 

yf ilt (t) = Fbackward (Ff orward (yraw (t))) (27) Subsequently, to prevent the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) from being numerically biased by the magnitude disparity between accelerations ( m/s 2) and bending moments ( kN · m), Z-score standardization is applied. Each sensor channel i is independently normalized to zero mean ( μi) and unit variance ( σi), ensuring all sensors contribute equally to the Hankel energy spectrum: 

y(i)

> norm

(t) = y(i)

> f ilt

(t) − μi

σi

(28) 

# 4 System Identification Results 

To assess the physical fidelity of the Hankel-DMD model, the extracted modal parameters were validated against two established baselines: the theoretical linearization provided by OpenFAST and the standard Stochastic Subspace Identification Covariance (SSI-COV) algorithm [51]. The correlation between the identified operational modes ( ϕop ) and the reference linear modes ( ϕref )was quantified using the Modal Assurance Criterion (MAC), defined as: MAC( ϕop , ϕref ) = ϕHop ϕref 

> 2

(ϕHop ϕop )( ϕHref ϕref ) (29) where ( ·)H denotes the Hermitian transpose. A MAC value approaching unity indicates a high degree of linear dependence between the mode shape vectors. 

4.1 Comparison with Linear Theory and Standard OMA 

Table 3 summarizes the results, highlighting the algorithm’s ability to distinguish true structural modes from environmental forcing. A critical divergence is observed in the Side-to-Side direction, 14 where the tower is subjected to strong periodic excitation from the rotating blades (3P effect). The SSI-COV analysis converged on a dominant mode at 0.638 Hz with a near-perfect MAC ( >

0.99). However, this frequency corresponds exactly to the 3P blade passing frequency (3 ×Ωrotor ), indicating that the subspace method conflated the deterministic harmonic forcing with the structural response. In contrast, the Hankel-DMD algorithm successfully separated the signal components, iden-tifying the true structural natural frequency at 0.524 Hz, distinct from the 3P forcing. By embedding the data into a high-dimensional trajectory space, the Hankel formulation resolved the difference between the autonomous decay of the structure and the persistent forcing of the rotor. This superior spectral selectivity ensures that the Digital Twin tracks the structural stiffness rather than simply monitoring the rotational speed of the turbine. While the linearized baseline represents a frozen state, the data-driven results capture the complex, time-varying interactions between the spinning rotor and the flexible tower. This leads to distinct, physically justified discrepancies in both mode topology and frequency. Table 3: Comparative System Identification Results: Frequency ( f ) and Damping ( ζ), (Linear Reference, SSI-COV and Hankel-DMD                                                              

> Mode Type Linear Ref (OpenFAST) SSI-COV (Standard) Hankel-DMD (Proposed) Physical Interpretation
> flin (Hz) ζlin (%) fssi (Hz) ζssi (%) MAC fdmd (Hz) ζdmd (%) MAC of Discrepancy 1st FA Tower 0.477 1.22 0.350 15.69 0.99 0.541 3.02 0.86 SSI: Conflated with Platform Pitch (High Damping).
> DMD: Captured Operational Stiffening & Aero Damping.
> 1st SS Tower 0.477 1.22 0.638 10.64 0.99 0.524 5.82 0.80 SSI: Locked onto 3P Harmonic Forcing.
> DMD: Isolated true structural resonance.
> 2nd FA Tower 1.542 1.46 1.995 3.12 0.70 1.674 5.09 0.22 SSI: Missed weak tower mode; found Blade Flapwise.
> DMD: Decoupled Tower S-shape from Blade Edge.
> 2nd SS Tower 2.003 2.17 2.054 1.55 0.69 2.042 1.80 0.77 Validated: Both methods identified the high-freq S-shape.

4.1.1 Topological Accuracy: The Gyroscopic S-Curve 

The most visible difference is the S-curve shape of the second Fore-Aft (FA) tower mode identified by DMD. The low MAC value (0.22) arises because the DMD mode shape includes an inflection point (node) that the linearized model fails to predict. This topology is physically justified by three main factors: (1) mechanical orthogonality dictates that a second bending mode must cross the neutral axis to remain distinct from the first mode, naturally necessitating an S-shaped topology; (2) the linearized model neglects the dynamic stiffening induced by the rotating rotor. As the blades spin at rated speed (Ω ≈ 12 .1 rpm), the conservation of angular momentum gen-erates a reactive gyroscopic moment at the nacelle, proportional to Mgyro ∝ Irotor 



Ω × ˙θtower 



.This reactive torque acts as an additional rotational spring, tightening the top boundary condi-tion and shifting the nodal position upward—a phenomenon captured only by the operational data; (3) the Hankel-DMD approach successfully decouples the structural vibration from the blade-passing frequencies (12 .1 rpm × 3 / 60 ≈ 0.61 Hz), ensuring the identified shape represents the true tower vibration rather than the smeared aerodynamic shadow seen in standard OMA. 

4.1.2 Capturing Operational Physics: Frequency and Damping Shifts 

Beyond mode topology, the analysis identified distinct shifts in eigenvalues: the 1st FA mode frequency increased by 13 .4% (0 .477 Hz → 0.541 Hz), while the damping ratio settled at ζ ≈

3.0%, significantly higher than the structural baseline ( ≈ 1%) but lower than the inflated SSI estimates ( ≈ 15%). These shifts are the distinct signatures of aero-elastic interaction. The frequency increase is driven by Aerodynamic Stiffness (the Wind Spring effect), where the changing angle of attack on the bending tower creates a dynamic restoring force, and Nonlinear Mooring Hardening , where the catenary lines stiffen as the platform surges. Simultaneously, the identified damping ratio of 3% correctly captures the Total Operational Damping—the sum 15 of structural dissipation and aerodynamic drag—validating the method’s suitability for fatigue load estimation. 

4.1.3 Probabilistic Mode Shapes and Physical Coupling 

A probabilistic sensitivity analysis ( d ∈ [45 , 75]) was performed to ensure the identified mode shapes are not numerical artifacts. The results, presented in Figure 5a and Figure 5b, show 95% confidence intervals (shaded regions) derived from the ensemble. A distinct geometric asymmetry is observed in the second mode nodes: the Fore-Aft node ( ≈ 45 m) is notably lower than the Side-to-Side node ( ≈ 60 m). This anisotropy stems from differential boundary stiffness at the nacelle; in the fore-aft direction, the tower couples with the compliant blade flapwise modes (soft boundary), allowing greater rotation and lowering the node. In contrast, the side-to-side direction encounters the significantly stiffer blade edgewise modes (rigid clamp), forcing the inflection point higher. While the tight confidence bounds along the tower mid-span confirm robust structural iden-tification, increased variance at the boundaries maps the intensity of environmental interactions. The variance at the tower base captures the non-stationary hydrodynamic coupling , reflect-ing the shifting inertial boundary condition caused by platform surge and pitch in varying sea states ( Hs ∈ [1 , 4] m). Conversely, the variance at the nacelle captures aerodynamic coupling ,where turbulence and rotor imbalances induce a wider envelope of tip deflections. This confirms that Hankel-DMD yields statistically consistent identification while successfully localizing the zones of aggressive aero-hydro-elastic driving forces.  

> (a) Fore-Aft (FA) Mode Shapes (b) Side-to-Side (SS) Mode Shapes

Figure 5: Probabilistic operational mode shapes derived from the ensemble of load cases and varying Hankel delay time. 

4.2 Full-Field Reconstruction 

Having validated the spectral fidelity of the identified modes, the assessment shifts to the time-domain predictive capabilities of the Digital Twin. The primary objective of this framework 16 is to function as a Real-Time Virtual Sensor , inferring the dynamic state of unobservable or difficult-to-monitor locations in FOWT using only a sparse subset of accessible sensors. 

4.2.1 Validation Protocol and Metrics 

To rigorously test robustness, the trained Hankel-DMD model was evaluated on a blind valida-tion set derived from the operational load cases described in Table 1. Crucially, rather than simply segmenting time, the validation strategy employs a randomized sensor masking protocol: specific sensor channels were systematically removed from the input vector during the testing phase, while the stochastic wind and wave loading remained active but unmeasured. This strict separation ensures that the reconstruction performance reflects the model’s ability to generalize spatial correlations and recover missing physics, rather than merely memorizing the training data. The reconstruction accuracy is quantified by comparing the Digital Twin’s prediction (ˆ x)against the high-fidelity OpenFAST simulation ground truth ( xtrue ) at every node along the tower. The predictive fidelity is assessed using two complementary metrics: the Normalized Root Mean Square Error (NRMSE) to assess error magnitude, and the Coefficient of Determination (R2) to evaluate variance capture: NRMSE = 

q 1

> N

P(xtrue − ˆx)2

max( xtrue ) − min( xtrue ) , R2 = 1 −

P(yi − ˆyi)2

P(yi − ¯y)2 (30) where xtrue (yi) is the ground truth, ˆ x (ˆ yi) is the model prediction, and ¯ y is the mean of the observed data. An NRMSE below 5% is generally considered sufficient for high-fidelity Digital Twin applications and fatigue load estimation [50, 52], while an R2 approaching 1 .0 confirms that the model successfully captures the signal’s dynamic variance under stochastic excitation. 

4.3 Temporal Evolution and Modal Decoupling: From Energy to Physics 

The temporal evolution of the identified Koopman modes is governed by the discrete-time linear recurrence bj+1 = Λb j as described in Eq. (17). In continuous time, these dynamics are represented by the complex exponential expansion: 

Dynamics j (t) = bj e(σj +iω j )t (31) where bj is the initial modal amplitude (calculated via the projection in Eq. (18) b = Φ†x0)and ωj is the oscillation frequency computed from (12). A critical distinction must be drawn between these physically isolated trajectories and the standard Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) temporal modes, defined as ΨP OD (t) = 

ΣV ∗ described in Eq. (11) and visulized in Fig. Fig. 3. While POD modes represent orthogonal energy structures that often mixed up multiple frequencies into a single vector, the DMD for-mulation effectively unmixes these components. This relationship is mathematically established by equating the data reconstruction from both perspectives: 

H ≈ UrΣrV∗ 

> r

(SVD Representation ) (32) 

H ≈ Φ · Dynamics (t) (Spectral Representation) (33) Substituting the definition of the Koopman modes ( Φ = UrW from Eq. (13)), the transforma-tion is drived in a way that decouples the mixed energy modes into pure spectral dynamics: 

Dynamics (t) ≈ W−1 (ΣrV∗ 

> r

) (34) Equation (34) demonstrates that the eigenvector matrix W−1 acts as a spectral filter, transform-ing the generic orthogonal basis ( V∗) into the specific mono-frequency evolution characteristic of structural eigenmodes. 17 Figure 6 presents these decoupled trajectories for the dominant Fore-Aft and Side-to-Side modes. These time histories reveal a distinct separation of scales in the modal amplitudes. The fundamental modes (Mode 22 FA, see Fig 6 (a), Mode 18 SS, and see Fig 6 (b)) dominate the system energy, exhibiting normalized amplitudes approximately 4 × to 8 × larger than the second-order modes. Despite this significant energy disparity, the spectral isolation provided by the Hankel-DMD framework successfully resolves the low-energy second bending modes (Mode 12 FA, Mode 10 SS) without them being masked by the dominant signal. Note that the rank of 24 was selected for SVD separations. The extracted time histories exhibit smooth, mono-frequency sinusoidal decay, devoid of the beating phenomena characteristic of harmonic interference or raw sensor data. This visually confirms the spectral selectivity of the method; unlike the chaotic superposition of waves and rotor vibrations seen in the input data, these reconstructed dynamics represent the pure, isolated structural response.  

> (a) Fore-Aft Mode Dynamics: Separation of Fundamental (0.54 Hz) and 2nd Order (1.67 Hz) modes.
> (b) Side-to-Side Mode Dynamics: Separation of Fundamental (0.52 Hz) and 2nd Order (2.04 Hz) modes.

Figure 6: Reconstructed time-domain evolution of the identified structural modes are shown for Fore-Aft mode (Fig a) and Side-to-Side mode (Fig b). The trajectories represent the decoupled mono-frequency dynamics (Eq. 31), isolating the specific exponential decay of each eigenmode independent of orthogonal energy mixing. 18 4.3.1 Spectral Stability and Mode Selection 

The physical validity of the identified dynamics is further examined by the discrete eigenvalue spectrum, presented in Figure 7. The eigenvalues μj govern the temporal evolution derived in Eq. (31) via the relation μj = e(σj +iω j )∆ t.As illustrated, the selected structural modes (marked by red stars) reside strictly within the unit circle ( |μj | < 1). This geometric placement confirms that the identified physics are asymp-totically stable, possessing positive damping consistent with a dissipative aero-hydro-elastic system. In contrast, the extraneous computational modes (blue circles) are algorithmically re-jected based on their spectral energy contribution, ensuring that the final Digital Twin is driven solely by physically realizable structural dynamics.  

> (a) Fore-Aft Stability Map (b) Side-to-Side Stability Map

Figure 7: Discrete eigenvalue spectra of the identified system. The structural modes (red stars) lie within the unit circle, confirming numerical stability and positive physical damping. The position of each pole dictates the frequency (angle) and decay rate (radius) observed in the time histories. In typical CFD applications (e.g., wake flow analysis), eigenvalues lie well inside the unit circle, reflecting rapid viscous dissipation of transient flow structures. In contrast, the eigenvalues identified for the FOWT case are located on near the unit circle ( |μ| ≈ 1), which is physically consistent with steady turbine operation, where continuous energy input from stochastic wind excitation balances structural damping, leading to sustained oscillatory responses rather than transient decay. 

4.4 Reconstruction Accuracy 

To evaluate the Digital Twin’s capability as a virtual sensor, the framework was subjected to three rigorous blind test scenarios. These scenarios represent realistic operational failures, ranging from the loss of specific tower nodes to massive data loss where nearly 50% of the sensor network is unavailable. The test cases, detailed in Table 4, were conducted on unseen Operational Load Cases (OLCs) to ensure the model was not simply memorizing specific wave patterns. Sensors 0–8 represent translational acceleration (Acc.), while Sensors 9–17 represent bending moments (Moment). The higher rank significantly improves fidelity for local aerodynamic loads (e.g., Sensor 17) compared 19 to lower-order truncations. Two distinct update horizons ( Tup ) were analyzed: a rapid update (Tup = 1 .0 s) representing real-time monitoring, and a delayed update ( Tup = 2 .0 s) to test the stability of the open-loop integration. Table 4: Definition of Virtual Sensing Test Scenarios.                

> Scenario OLCs Hidden Sensors (Indices) Failure Description
> Case A 52, 3, 5, 7, 11, 12, 14, 16 Massive Failure: 8 sensors lost (Distributed along tower). Case B 70, 8, 9, 17 Boundary Loss: Tower Base (0) and Top/Nacelle (17) lost. Case C 20, 8, 9, 17 Low-Wave Condition: Similar Case B.

4.5 Short-Horizon Reconstruction Fidelity ( Tup = 1 .0 s) 

The reconstruction results for the 1.0-second update horizon demonstrate exceptional fidelity across all load cases. As detailed in Table 5 and Figure 8, the Digital Twin inferred the missing dynamics with R2 values consistently exceeding 0 .95 and NRMSE errors typically below 3%. In Scenario A (Massive Failure) , despite the loss of 8 sensors, the framework recon-structed missing channels with remarkably high accuracy (e.g., Sensor 11: R2 = 0 .99, NRMSE=0 .89%). This confirms that the Hankel-DMD basis successfully captures the global spatial correlations; even with sparse data, the global mode shapes ( Φ) constrain the solution to the correct physical state. Similarly, in Scenarios B and C , critical boundary nodes—often physical blind spots for SHM—were recovered with precision ( R2 > 0.95). Table 5: Quantitative reconstruction performance for virtual sensing under the 1.0 s update horizon, utilizing a Hankel delay of Td = 60 s and a converged SVD rank of r = 90. Sensors 0–8 represent translational acceleration (Acc.), while Sensors 9–17 represent bending moments (Moment). The high rank enables sub-1% error rates for mid-span moments and robust recon-struction of complex boundary loads. 

Scenario Missing Sensor Node (Type) R2 Score NRMSE [%] 

Case A: Massive Failure (Mixed Distribution) 

Sensor 11 (Lower-Mid Moment) 0.996 0.89 Sensor 12 (Mid-Tower Moment) 0.996 0.90 Sensor 14 (Upper-Tower Moment) 0.994 1.07 Sensor 2 (Lower-Tower Acc.) 0.993 1.23 Sensor 3 (Lower-Tower Acc.) 0.989 1.52 Sensor 16 (Sub-Nacelle Moment) 0.984 1.63 Sensor 7 (Sub-Nacelle Acc.) 0.988 1.65 Sensor 5 (Mid-Tower Acc.) 0.943 3.95 

Case B: Boundary Loss (Base and Nacelle) 

Sensor 9 (Base Moment) 0.998 0.76 Sensor 8 (Nacelle Acc.) 0.994 1.20 Sensor 0 (Base Acc.) 0.993 1.26 Sensor 17 (Nacelle Moment) 0.956 3.23 

Case C: Low-Wave Condition (Base and Nacelle) 

Sensor 9 (Base Moment) 0.998 0.75 Sensor 0 (Base Acc.) 0.996 0.97 Sensor 8 (Nacelle Acc.) 0.995 1.25 Sensor 17 (Nacelle Moment) 0.966 3.23 

20 (a) Case A: Mid-Span Moment (Sensor 11) 

> (b) Case A: Mid-Span Accel (Sensor 5)
> (c) Case B: Nacelle Moment (3 Unknown OLCs)
> (d) Case C: Nacelle Moment (10 Unknown OLCs)

Figure 8: Time-series reconstruction results for the 1.0 s update horizon. Top row compares a high-fidelity mid-span reconstruction (a) with the challenging nodal point reconstruction (b). Bottom row illustrates the impact of environmental conditions on the nacelle moment, comparing rough sea states (c) against stable calm water conditions (d). 21 4.6 Physical Interpretation of Reconstruction Challenges 

The dependence on a higher-order basis ( r = 90) is governed by location-dependent structural dynamics. While intermediate sensors benefit from the coherent global sway, specific challenges arise at the boundaries and modal nodes due to signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) degradation and local forcing regimes. 

4.6.1 Modal Nodal Interaction (Mid-Tower / Sensor 5) 

The reconstruction of the mid-tower accelerometer (Sensor 5) is sensitive to the second tower bending mode. Since the mode shape ϕ2(z) exhibits a stationary node (zero-crossing) near the mid-span, the physical displacement at Sensor 5 is minimized during excitation (e.g., OLC 5). This nodal cancellation significantly reduces the local SNR. A low-rank approximation filters this weak signal as noise; however, the extended rank ( r = 90) successfully captures the higher-order, low-energy modal contributions driving this location, restoring accuracy to R2 ≈ 0.94. 

4.6.2 Hydro-Aerodynamic Boundary Injection (Sensors 0 & 17) 

A distinct conflict between Inertial Response and Direct Forcing is observed at the boundaries. For the Nacelle dynamic at the top node, a clear divergence exists between the Nacelle Accelera-tion (Sensor 8, R2 ≈ 0.99) and Bending Moment (Sensor 17, R2 ≈ 0.96). Sensor 8 measures the kinematic response (global sway), which is easily captured by the dominant modes. Conversely, Sensor 17 measures the kinetic forcing, containing high-frequency aerodynamic inputs (turbu-lence, rotor torque ripples) that are local to the hub and not mechanically filtered by the tower. Similarly, the tower base (Sensor 0) is subject to direct hydrodynamic wave loading. In high sea states (Case B), the dynamics are a superposition of the structural response and chaotic wave-frequency excitation. These direct injections are locally significant but globally sub-dominant in energy. Consequently, the extended spectral basis ( r = 90) is required to separate this local fluid-structure interaction from the stochastic background noise. The time-frequency analysis (Figure 8c and 8d) offers critical insight into the system’s aero-hydro-elastic coupling. For the Nacelle Moment (Sensor 17), the dominant energy bands (cen-tered at 0 .5 Hz and 2 .0 Hz) exhibit marked temporal intermittency, appearing as localized ”bursts” rather than continuous bands. This spectral fragmentation validates the Digital Twin’s handling of non-stationary excita-tion. Unlike the tower base, which is dominated by inertial surging and swaying, the nacelle moment is driven by rotor harmonics (1 P/ 3P ), that causing harmonic fading of frequencies. As the variable-speed controller adjusts the rotor speed in response to wind turbulence, the exci-tation frequency shifts, causing momentary detuning from the structural eigenfrequencies. The spectrogram captures these ”lock-in” and ”drop-out” events: bright spectral regions correspond to moments of resonance alignment, while the ”disappearing” modes indicate controller-induced frequency shifts or a pause in turbulent intensity. The high fidelity of the virtual reconstruction in tracking these rapid spectral transitions confirms that the Hankel-DMD model effectively captures the variable-speed and high-damping characteristics of the floating wind turbine. The long-duration analysis of one-hour simulation in Figure 9 demonstrates the model’s stability. A distinct operational shift is observed between t = 1700–2600 s, characterized by a significant drop in vibration amplitude due to low-wind condition. The Digital Twin accurately identifies this quiet zone, predicting a corresponding dropout in the high-frequency spectral content (visi-ble as the dark central region in the spectrogram). This confirms that the Hankel-DMD basis is not overfitted to a single load case but robustly generalizes across varying environmental states. 22 Figure 9: Long-term reconstruction fidelity for Sensor 8, representing nacelle acceleration over 3600 s. The analysis captures a distinct operational transition between t ≈ 1700 s and t ≈ 2600 s, characterized by a significant reduction in vibration amplitude. The spectrogram confirms that the digital twin correctly predicts this quiet zone, reproducing the dropout of high-frequency spectral energy without hallucinating false vibrations. 

4.7 Spectral Energy Analysis and Rank Optimization 

The high fidelity observed at critical nodes is a direct result of optimizing the SVD truncation rank. A singular value decomposition of the validation Hankel matrix reveals the system’s energy distribution (Figure 10). The spectrum exhibits a characteristic decay: 

• Zone I ( k ≤ 34 ): The dominant subspace capturing high-energy global modes. 

• Zone II ( 50 ≤ k ≤ 90 ): A heavy tail region containing sub-dominant, low-energy modes before the spectrum flattens into the noise floor (estimated via the Gavish-Donoho thresh-old [53]). While a moderate rank ( r ≈ 24) is sufficient for system identification, this study found that extending the rank to r = 90 was strictly necessary for real-time virtual sensing. This extended basis allows the reconstruction to resolve fine-scale spatial correlations that are energetically overshadowed by the fundamental sway but physically essential for boundary and nodal point accuracy. 

4.7.1 The Lyapunov Limit 

A critical finding of this study is the identification of the prediction horizon, or the Lyapunov Limit, of the Digital Twin. When the data assimilation interval was extended to Tup = 2 .0 s, 23 Figure 10: Singular value spectrum ( σk) of the Hankel matrix illustrating the energy distribution across dynamic modes. The spectrum is divided into two operational regimes: Zone I ( 24 ≤

k ≤ 34 ) represents the high-energy subspace governing global structural modes, suitable for Operational Modal Analysis. Zone II ( 50 ≤ k ≤ 90 ) highlights the sub-dominant, low-energy subspace required for high-fidelity Virtual Sensing. Inclusion of Zone II is necessary to resolve local boundary injections (e.g., Sensor 17) and nodal point dynamics (e.g., Sensor 5) that are energetically distinct from the global dynamics. a marked degradation in performance was observed. The R2 scores dropped significantly (e.g., Case A, Sensor 2 dropped from 0 .97 to 0 .58), and NRMSE values spiked to > 8%. In the most severe instance (Case A, Sensor 5), the model lost coherence entirely ( R2 < 0). This degradation highlights the distinction between reconstruction and forecasting . The FOWT is a non-linear, chaotic system driven by stochastic turbulence. The linear Hankel-DMD model accurately approximates these dynamics over short intervals (∆ t ≈ 1 s), but open-loop integration errors accumulate exponentially beyond this window. Consequently, to maintain fatigue-grade accuracy ( < 5% error), the Digital Twin requires data assimilation updates at a frequency of approximately 1 Hz. Crucially, this requirement is highly practical for deployment; modern offshore wind farms typically employ fiber-optic SCADA networks capable of streaming high-frequency logs at 1–50 Hz ( [54]). Therefore, the proposed framework fits well within the bandwidth and telemetry constraints of existing oper-ational infrastructure, requiring only standard 1 Hz synchronization to mitigate drift. 

# 5 Conclusion 

This study demonstrates that the Hankel-Dynamic Mode Decomposition (Hankel-DMD) frame-work provides a robust, computationally efficient foundation for Floating Offshore Wind Turbine (FOWT) Digital Twins. Unlike ’grey-box’ approaches that rely on pre-defined partial differen-tial equations—which often fail to capture the coupled complexity of floating structures—this work validates an Equation-Free Operator-Theoretic framework. By leveraging a purely data-driven architecture, the proposed method retains the spectral interpretability of physics-based models—functioning effectively as a ’Glass-Box’ approach—while bypassing the limitations of both opaque neural networks and rigid physical assumptions. 24 Figure 11: Estimation of the maximal Lyapunov exponent ( λmax ) for the top tower acceleration. The logarithmic divergence of trajectories follows a linear trend with a slope of λmax ≈ 1.23, corresponding to a Lyapunov time (prediction horizon) of Tλ ≈ 0.81 s. This theoretical limit aligns with the virtual sensing results, explaining the rapid degradation in accuracy when the open-loop update horizon (2 .0 s) exceeds the valid chaotic prediction window. By shifting the modeling perspective from non-linear state spaces to linear state-observable manifolds, the framework achieves the predictive power of advanced machine learning while re-taining the rigorous interpretability of modal analysis. The results confirm that the Hankel for-mulation successfully isolates true structural resonances from high-energy harmonic interference, such as rotor-induced 3P frequencies. Crucially, this selectivity is rank-dependent; expanding the basis to r = 90 allowed the model to decouple dominant global dynamics from sub-dominant local vibrations, a distinction often missed by standard subspace system identification low-order methods. This capacity for spectral separation underpins the framework’s success in virtual sensing, where it achieved Normalized Root Mean Square Errors (NRMSE) consistently below 1% for missing sensor reconstruction, even under active but unmeasured stochastic loading. Furthermore, the model correctly identified key aero-elastic phenomena, including gyroscopic stiffening and operational damping, providing a higher fidelity representation of the system’s health than standard linearized baselines. While this work establishes a strong deterministic baseline, the identification of a 1 .0 s Lyapunov limit underscores the necessity of high-frequency data assimilation to prevent error accumulation in chaotic regimes. To exceed this limitation, future research must move beyond deterministic inversion toward Probabilistic Bayesian Filtering. While Augmented Kalman Fil-ters are standard for state estimation, they often struggle to accurately resolve time-varying ”engineering modes” (e.g., aero-elastic damping ratios) in highly non-Gaussian environments. A promising avenue is the integration of Hankel-DMD with Sequential Monte Carlo or Vari-ational Inference on koopam observable function rather than state-space model, which would allow for the rigorous quantification of uncertainty in modal parameter estimation—a capability currently lacking in standard AKF implementations. Also, the inherent versatility of this structurally independent framework and its flexibil-ity suggests a scalable pathway for Fleet-Level Monitoring. Since the Hankel-DMD operator captures the fundamental topology of the system’s dynamics independent of specific sensor placements, future work should explore Population-Based SHM. By leveraging transfer learn-25 ing, the Koopman linear operators learned from a subset of instrumented turbines could be adapted to monitor entire wind farms, drastically reducing the computational and hardware cost of managing massive offshore assets. 

# Acknowledgments 

This work was supported by the Research Council of Finland under the project Dynamic Equa-tion Free Project (Grant No. 130203-1). The authors gratefully acknowledge the Council’s financial support, which made this research possible. 

# References 

[1] Krathe, V. L., Jonkman, J., & Bachynski-Poli´ c, E. E. (2025). The influence of wind veer and drivetrain flexibility on fatigue loading for large floating wind turbines. Wind Energy ,27(1), 15–37. [2] Bilbao, J., Lourens, E. M., Schulze, A., & Ziegler, L. (2022). Virtual sensing in an onshore wind turbine tower using a Gaussian process latent force model. Data-Centric Engineering ,3, e35. [3] Kim, Y., Choi, Y., & Yoo, B. (2024). Gappy AE: A nonlinear approach for gappy data re-construction using auto-encoder. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering ,426, 116978. [4] Simpson, H. A., Chatzi, E. N., & Chatzis, M. N. (2026). A comparison of deterministic and Bayesian model updating frameworks for identifying offshore wind turbine foundation parameters. Journal of Sound and Vibration , 625, 119575. [5] Ozan, D. E., N´ ovoa, A., & Magri, L. (2025). Data Assimilated Model Based Reinforcement Learning for Partially Observed Chaotic Flows. CoRR .[6] Xie, H., Wan, L., Shi, F., Xin, J., Zhou, H., He, B., Jin, C., & Michailides, C. (2025). A Joint Method on Dynamic States Estimation for Digital Twin of Floating Offshore Wind Turbines. Journal of Marine Science and Engineering , 13(10). [7] Yang, Y., Liang, F., Zhu, Q., & Zhang, H. (2024). An overview on structural health mon-itoring and fault diagnosis of offshore wind turbine support structures. Journal of Marine Science and Engineering , 12 (3), 377. [8] Duarte, T. M., Sarmento, A. J. N. A., & Jonkman, J. (2014). Effects of second order hydro-dynamic forces on floating offshore wind turbines. In 32nd ASME Wind Energy Symposium 

(Paper No. AIAA 2014-0361), National Harbor, MD. [9] Majda, A. J. & Chen, N. (2018). Model Error, Information Barriers, State Estimation and Prediction in Complex Multiscale Systems. Entropy , 20(9), 644. [10] Caglio, L., Sadeqi, A., Stang, H., & Katsanos, E. (2025). Joint input-state estimation of structures subjected to complex loads via augmented Kalman Filter with physics informed latent force models. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , 223, 111852. [11] Moynihan, B., Mehrjoo, A., Moaveni, B., McAdam, R., R¨ udinger, F., & Hines, E. (2023). System identification and finite element model updating of a 6 MW offshore wind turbine using vibrational response measurements. Renewable Energy , 219, 119430. 26 [12] Vettori, S., Di Lorenzo, E., Peeters, B., Luczak, M. M., & Chatzi, E. (2023). An adaptive-noise Augmented Kalman Filter approach for input-state estimation in structural dynamics. 

Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , 184, 109654. [13] Grande, D., Buizza, R., & Storto, A. (2026). Machine learning in ocean data assimilation: Advances, gaps and the road to operations. Ocean Modelling , 102678. [14] Shahin, M., Nasr, A. N., Malhi, A., Bauk, S., Banda, O. V., Kujala, P., ... & Wang, S. (2025). Hybrid Physics-AI Digital Twin Framework for Shared Mooring Systems in Deep-water Floating Offshore Wind Farms. Authorea Preprints .[15] Taze, I. E., Hoda, M. A., Miquelez, I., Maddaloni, P., & Eftekhar Azam, S. (2025). A Review of Digital Twinning Applications for Floating Offshore Wind Turbines: Insights, Innovations, and Implementation. Energies , 18(13), 3369. [16] Raji´ c, M., Manˇ ci´ c, M., Glumac, A., Rossi, M., & Rebelo, C. (2025). Digital twins and AI integration in offshore renewable energy: A Review. IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science , 1552(1), 012007. [17] Dang, H. V., & Nguyen, P. C. (2026). Deep operator learning for high-fidelity fluid flow field reconstruction from sparse sensor measurements. Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering , 26(1), 011007. [18] Madushele, N., Olatunji, O. O., & Adedeji, P. A. (2026). Digital Twin Technology in Con-dition Monitoring of Wind Turbines . CRC Press. [19] Sanchis-Agudo, M., Wang, Y., Arnau, R., Guastoni, L., Lim, J., Duraisamy, K., & Vinuesa, R. (2025). Easy attention: A simple attention mechanism for temporal predictions with transformers. APL Computational Physics , 1(1). [20] Duth´ e, G., Evangelou, N., Liu, W., Kevrekidis, I. G., & Chatzi, E. (2025). A Mechanistic Analysis of Transformers for Dynamical Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.21113 .[21] Song, J., Zhou, K., Shu, Z. R., Cai, X. Y., & Duan, M. G. (2025). Automated modal identification of offshore wind turbines via an uncertainty-quantified stochastic subspace method. Ocean Engineering , 342, 123152. [22] Oliveira, G., Magalh˜ aes, F., Cunha, ´A., & Caetano, E. (2018). Continuous dynamic moni-toring of an onshore wind turbine. Engineering Structures , 164, 22–39. [23] Weil, M., Jurado, C. S., Weijtjens, W., & Devriendt, C. (2025). Machine learning and uncertainty quantification to track and monitor natural frequencies in vibration-based SHM applied to offshore wind turbines. Data-Centric Engineering , 6, e7. [24] Liu, Y., Liang, J., & Wang, Y. (2023). Support condition identification of wind turbines based on a statistical time-domain damping parameter. Inverse Problems , 39(12), 125021. [25] Brijder, R., Helsen, S., & Ompusunggu, A. P. (2023). Switching kalman filtering-based corrosion detection and prognostics for offshore wind-turbine structures. Wind , 3(1), 1–13. [26] Wei, S., Wang, X., Gao, X., Li, Z., Huo, Z., & Xu, C. (2025). Motion estimation of floating wind turbines based on Kalman filter using simplified theoretical model. Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments , 82, 104522. [27] Ammerman, I., Alkarem, Y., Kimball, R. W., Huguenard, K., & Hejrati, B. (2025). Real-Time Structural Dynamics Estimation of Floating Wind Turbines Via Linear and Non-Linear Kalman Filtering. SSRN 5177776 .27 [28] Liew, J., G¨ o¸ cmen, T., Lio, W. H., & Larsen, G. C. (2022). Streaming dynamic mode decomposition for short-term forecasting in wind farms. Wind Energy , 25(4), 719–734. [29] Lydon, B., Polagye, B., & Brunton, S. (2025). Data-driven modeling of an oscillating surge wave energy converter using dynamic mode decomposition. Journal of Renewable and Sus-tainable Energy , 17(2). [30] Serani, A., Dragone, P., Stern, F., & Diez, M. (2023). On the use of dynamic mode de-composition for time-series forecasting of ships operating in waves. Ocean Engineering , 267, 113235. [31] Iungo, G. V., Santoni-Ortiz, C., Abkar, M., Port´ e-Agel, F., Rotea, M. A., & Leonardi, S. (2015). Data-driven reduced order model for prediction of wind turbine wakes. Journal of Physics: Conference Series , 625(1), 012009. [32] Annoni, J. R., Nichols, J., & Seiler, P. J. (2016). Wind farm modeling and control using dynamic mode decomposition. In 34th Wind Energy Symposium , 2201. [33] Liu, F., Gao, S., Tian, Z., & Liu, D. (2020). A new time-frequency analysis method based on single mode function decomposition for offshore wind turbines. Marine Structures , 72, 102782. [34] Pitchforth, D. J., Rogers, T. J., Tygesen, U. T., & Cross, E. J. (2021). Grey-box models for wave loading prediction. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , 159 , 107741. [35] Tygesen, U. T., Cross, E. J., Gardner, P., Worden, K., Qadri, B. A., & Rogers, T. J. (2021). Digital transformation by the implementation of the true digital twin concept and big data technology for structural integrity management. In Proceedings of Asset Integrity Management-Ageing and Life Extension Conference .[36] McGreivy, N., & Hakim, A. (2024). Weak baselines and reporting biases lead to overop-timism in machine learning for fluid-related partial differential equations. Nature machine intelligence , 6 (10), 1256-1269. [37] Kutz, J. N., Brunton, S. L., Brunton, B. W., & Proctor, J. L. (2016). Dynamic mode decomposition: data-driven modeling of complex systems . Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. [38] Bai, Z., Kaiser, E., Proctor, J. L., Kutz, J. N., & Brunton, S. L. (2020). Dynamic mode decomposition for compressive system identification. AIAA Journal , 58 (2), 561-574. [39] Palma, G., Bardazzi, A., Lucarelli, A., Pilloton, C., Serani, A., Lugni, C., & Diez, M. (2025). Analysis, forecasting, and system identification of a floating offshore wind turbine using dynamic mode decomposition. Journal of Marine Science and Engineering , 13(4), 656. [40] X. Dai, D. Xu, M. Zhang, and R. J. A. M. Stevens, A three-dimensional dynamic mode decomposition analysis of wind farm flow aerodynamics, Renewable Energy , vol. 191, pp. 608–624, 2022. [41] Korda, M., & Mezi´ c, I. (2018). Linear predictors for nonlinear dynamical systems: Koopman operator meets model predictive control. Automatica , 93 , 149-160. [42] Kantamneni, S., Liu, Z., & Tegmark, M. (2024). How Do Transformers Model Physics? Investigating the Simple Harmonic Oscillator. Entropy , 26 (11), 997. 28 [43] National Renewable Energy Laboratory. OpenFAST Documentation — OpenFAST v4.1.2 documentation . Available at: https://openfast.readthedocs.io/ (Accessed: December 15, 2025). [44] Jonkman, J.M. and Buhl, M.L. Jr. (2005). FAST User’s Guide—Updated August 2005 .Technical Report. National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL): Golden, CO, USA. [45] Jonkman, J. (2010). Definition of the floating system for phase IV of OC3 . Technical Re-port NREL/TP-200-47535. National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). Available at: 

https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy10osti/47535.pdf (Accessed: 3 February 2025). [46] Robertson, A., Jonkman, J., Vorpahl, F., Popko, W., Qvist, J., Frøyd, L., ... Gu´ erinel, M. (2014, June). Offshore code comparison collaboration continuation within IEA wind task 30: Phase II results regarding a floating semisubmersible wind system. In International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering (Vol. 45547, p. V09BT09A012). American Society of Mechanical Engineers. [47] Jonkman, J.M. (2007). Dynamics Modeling and Loads Analysis of an Offshore Floating Wind Turbine . PhD Thesis. University of Colorado Boulder: Boulder, CO, USA. [48] Kane, T.R. and Levinson, D.A. (1985). Dynamics, Theory and Applications . McGraw Hill: New York, NY, USA. [49] Galv´ an, J., Dom´ ınguez, J. M., & Albizuri, J. (2025). Operational modal analysis applied to floating offshore wind turbine dynamics identification in wave basins in the presence of free-surface modes. Ocean Engineering , 327 , 120909. [50] Mehlan, F. C., Keller, J., & Nejad, A. R. (2023). Virtual sensing of wind turbine hub loads and drivetrain fatigue damage. Forschung im Ingenieurwesen , 87(1), 207–218. [51] Peeters, B., and De Roeck, G. (1999). Reference-based stochastic subspace identification for output-only modal analysis. Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , 13(6), 855–878. [52] Branlard, E., Jonkman, J., Brown, C., & Zhang, J. (2024). A digital twin solution for floating offshore wind turbines validated using a full-scale prototype. Wind Energy Science ,9(1), 1–24. [53] M. Gavish and D. L. Donoho, “The optimal hard threshold for singular values is 4 /√3,” 

IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 5040–5053, Aug. 2014, doi: 10.1109/TIT.2014.2323359. [54] Gonzalez, E., Stephen, B., Infield, D., Melero, J. J. (2019). Using high-frequency SCADA data for wind turbine performance monitoring: A sensitivity study. Renewable energy, 131, 841-853. 29